MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
MEGALIVING!
3O DAYS TO A PERFECT LIFE
The Ultimate Action Plan
for Total Mastery of Your Mind, Body & Character
By Robin S. Sharma, LL.B., LL.M.
i
ii MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
MEGALIVING!
3O DAYS TO A PERFECT LIFE
The Ultimate Action Plan
for Total Mastery of Your Mind, Body & Character
By Robin S. Sharma, LL.B., LL.M.
Toronto • London, England
iii
HAUNSLA
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
Copyright © 1994 by Robin S. Sharma. All Rights Reserved.
No part of this book may be reproduced or transmitted, in any form
or by any means, without the express written permission of the
publisher and the author. Exceptions are made for brief
excerpts used in published reviews.
Published by: The Haunsla Corporation
7B Pleasant Boulevard,
Suite 957
Toronto, Canada
M4T 1K2
Canadian Cataloguing in Publication Data
Sharma, Robin Shilp, 1964-
MegaLiving!: 30 days to a perfect life
ISBN 0-9698225-0-2
1. Success - Psychological aspects
I. Title
BF637. S8S53 1994 158’ . 1 C94-931043-3
Third Printing March 1995
Copy editing by Bill Belfontaine
Typesetting and text design by Karen Petherick
Cover photos by Keith Penner
Graphics by Rod Brandt
Printed and Manufactured in Canada
MegaLiving! is a trademark of the Haunsla Corporation.
The author has made every effort to provide an authoritative study on
this subject but is not providing any form of professional advice. It is
highly recommended that the reader seek the assistance of a trained
medical professional where there are any concerns as to a new program
aimed at physical improvement and excellence.
iv
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
Dedicated to my wonderful wife Alka for her
affection, to my brother Sanjay and his wife Susan for
their inspiration and to my parents, Shiv and Shashi
Sharma for showing me the way to MegaLiving!
For my son Colby.
v
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
Someone has well said, “Success is a journey, not a
destination.” Happiness is to be found along the way, not at
the end of the road, for then the journey is over and it is
too late. Today, this hour, this minute is the day, the hour,
the minute for each of us to sense the fact that life is good,
with all its trials and troubles and perhaps more interesting
because of them.
Robert R. Updegraff
vi
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Preface by Robin Sharma . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .viii
PART I: THE MEGALIVING! PHILOSOPHY
Chapter One : MegaLiving! Achieving Mastery of the Mind, Body and Character
i) The Ultimate Challenge . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
ii) The Power of Limitless Living . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
iii) The Promise of MegaLiving! . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
iv) Excelling with the Program and Igniting Your Life . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
Chapter Two : Your Mind and its Unlimited Potential
i) Your Commitment to Self-Mastery: Kaizen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
ii) The Nature of the Mind: The Ultimate Superpower . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
iii) Discipline and Willpower: The Golden Keys . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
iv) The FeelGood Principle and Beliefs: How to Unleash Vitality . . . . . . . . . 29
v) MegaThinking and the Enchantment of Positivity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
vi) The Magic of Goals: Your Visions of Excellence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .34
Chapter Three : Your Body: Achieving Physical Mastery
i) The Power of Exercise: Your Fountain of Youth . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
ii) The Magic of Diet: Eating Your Way to Excellence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
iii) 5 Ancient Secrets of the East for Longevity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
Chapter Four : Your Character: Attaining Public Excellence and Private Victory
i) The Pleasures of Proactivity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 67
ii) You are Unstoppable: Momentum on the Path to Mastery . . . . . . . . . . . . 70
iii) Developing a Mission Statement for Self-Mastery . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 71
iv) How to Attract Wealth & Prosperity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 73
v) The Lost Art of Effective Personal Management . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 76
vi) The 8 Keys to the Path of Mastery . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 80
PART II: THE 200 POWERFUL MASTER SECRETS FOR MEGALIVING! . . . . . . 89
PART III: THE MEGALIVING! 30 DAY PROGRAM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 127
PART IV: THE MEGALIVING! SUCCESSLOG . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .159
vii
viii MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
Preface
This Revolutionary Book Will Change Your Life!
WE ALL have the potential for a Perfect Life. We all have the
potential to achieve great things and live a life filled with joy,
accomplishment and pure bliss. In some of us, this potential is
slumbering deep inside, waiting only to be tapped and tested. The
most noble of pursuits is to ignite this fire for personal mastery and life
excellence. This book is the only tool you will ever need to do this.
There is a story of a weary traveller who met a wise sage on a
mountain path high in the Himalayas. The traveller asked the old man
where he could find the path which would lead him to the top of the
mountain, his ultimate destination. The sage thought for a moment
and then replied: “simply make certain that every single step is in the
direction of the mountain top and you will get there.”
When your every thought and your every action is directed to
your ultimate life goals, you become unstoppable and assured of great
success and happiness. When you cultivate your mind, body and
character, your life takes on powerful dimensions that you never
thought possible. This book will provide you with all that you need to
put far more living into your life.
Part I of MegaLiving! contains the leading principles of personal
mastery and successful living. Part II will reveal to you the 200 Master
Secrets for making your life a magical dream while Part III contains the
revolutionary 30 Day Program to a Perfect Life. This book will do
wonders for you. Read it, apply it and share it. A Perfect Life is yours
for the taking.
Robin S. Sharma, LL.B., LL.M.
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life ix

MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life 1
THE ULTIMATE CHALLENGE
There are people who make things happen. There are people who
watch things happen. And there are people who say, “what
happened?” The MegaLiving! program will quickly make things
happen in every aspect of your life. You will learn the finest strategies
and techniques available to profoundly improve your mind, body and
character. This book will show you, in a very exciting and practical
way, how to put far more living into your life. There is no doubt that
you have within you incredible powers to achieve anything you have
ever dreamed about. Whether it is mental, physical, emotional or
financial mastery that you are seeking, this book will show you
precisely how to get there. MegaLiving!, which contains the
revolutionary results of over ten years of research into the secrets of
successful living offers you a highly effective collection of powerful, yet
easy to use tools that you can use today to live with greater satisfaction,
peace of mind and vitality.
This book contains the master keys to dynamic living. You have
the potential for a perfect life, this is certain. And if you commit
yourself totally to this program for 30 days, you will receive the
following benefits:
Some men see things as they are and say “why”;
I dream of things that never were and say “why not.”
George Bernard Shaw
CHAPTER ONE
MegaLiving! Achieving Mastery of the Mind,
Body & Character
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
i) a deep sense of well-being and happiness
ii) strategies to erase the worry habit and have far more confidence
iii) richer relationships that really last
iv) little-known skills for self-mastery and peak performance
v) an understanding of the powerful Eastern secrets of longevity
vi) boundless energy, enthusiasm and glowing health
vii) greater serenity, tranquility and a radiant personality
viii) tools to achieve lasting prosperity and financial independence
ix) proven techniques to take control of your destiny.
Today is the first day of your perfect life, a life that is yours to
shape into something truly wonderful and lasting. The past does not
determine your future and a change towards personal excellence can
happen in the blink of an eye if you will make a firm commitment to
raising your life to its highest level. This program is for winners -
people who know that their lives are more than their current
circumstances, no matter how successful they might be at this
moment. The fact that you have invested in this program sets you
apart from the vast majority of people and demonstrates that you are
determined to be a peak performer and condition your mind, body and
character for lifelong excellence. Accept the challenge to tap into the
richness of your personal potential and dare to be great!
The First Step
Now shut your eyes, take five deep breaths and picture this scene
taking place many years into the future: you are in an elegant dining
hall, surrounded by those closest to you (who are dressed formally and
beautifully). The candles shimmer on every table and the importance
of the evening wafts through the air like the aromas from the kitchen.
This is your testimonial dinner, an opportunity for the people who
know you best to speak about you as a person, your achievements and
your contributions to those you love and to society in general. Reflect
on what you would like them to say. At this dinner, in the twilight of
your life, do you really want to hear that you have lived in an
uninspired fashion, without passion and without concrete
accomplishment? How would you feel on hearing that you did not
even come close to meeting your mental, physical, financial and
spiritual potential? How would you feel on hearing that your dreams,
2
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
however lofty, went unfulfilled and that you never did supercharge
your life because you were always too busy trying to pay the bills and
so very tired at the end of your day?
With MegaLiving! you are getting a second chance to powerfully
change what you will hear at your testimonial dinner. This book is
your most important wake-up call! If you follow the program daily,
think about it seriously and apply the concepts regularly, making a
decision from the core of your heart to live your life in a magical and
special way, you will hear very sweet sounds at your testimonial dinner.
The guests will happily testify to your exceptional personal
effectiveness, your dynamic personality and compassion for others,
your unique zest for life and your outstanding accomplishments.
Becoming the very best you can be is life’s most noble pursuit. Selfmastery
is the DNA of life mastery. If you want to lead a corporation,
learn to lead yourself first. If you want to manage a team or a family,
learn to manage yourself first. Success on the outside begins with
success on the inside and if you truly want to profoundly improve the
quality of your outer world, you must first improve your inner world.
There is nothing more noble than learning to explore the unlimited
potential of your mind and becoming the very best that you can be.
This is the ultimate challenge of the MegaLiving! mastery program.
Accept it with great energy and welcome yourself to the new reality of
a Perfect Life.
THE POWER OF LIMITLESS LIVING
Deep within man dwell those slumbering powers; powers that would
astonish him, that he never dreamed of possessing; forces that would
revolutionize his life if aroused and put into action.
Orison Sweet Marden
One of the most essential truths to recognize is the fact that the only
limits on what we can achieve in life are those we create and place on
ourselves. Circumstances are the creation of people and not the other
way around. Peak performers, as opposed to the weak performers, have
trained themselves to shape the events of their lives rather than being
shaped by them. Think of the current limitations in your life, the
obstacles preventing you from attaining your dreams and that state of
3
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
bliss you so much desire. You have interpreted each one of these
circumstances to be a roadblock or negative element in your life when
this is not the case.
One of the most fundamental of all strategies for success is also
one of the most simple: there is no such thing as a negative
circumstance, only a circumstance that you may learn from. There are
no mistakes in life, only lessons which will allow you to grow and
advance higher on the path of self-mastery. If you set limits on yourself
such as “I am too young to be a multi-millionaire,” “I am not smart
enough to be a world leader,” “I am too lazy to start my own business”
or, “I don’t have enough money to do this,” your spirit will slowly die
and you will fulfill your negative prophecy. Stop being a prisoner of
your past - become the architect of your future. Every event happens
for a special purpose. Every problem is a special challenge from which
we can learn and prosper to new heights of achievement. Every
moment is perfect in nature, whether you realize it or not. If you
recognize this age-old truth, you will accept every experience with
gratitude and you will see the opportunity in every event, no matter
how challenging it might appear initially. If you don’t understand this
principle, you will never realize the wonderful destiny that is yours for
the taking.
The mind has immeasurable and vast potential that remains
untapped in most people. It has been said that even the best
conditioned thinkers use only about 25% of their minds. What
happened to the remaining 75%? Indian yogis living high up in the
Himalayan mountains have disciplined their minds to the point where
they can control their so-called involuntary processes such as their
heartbeat, digestion and nervous functioning. These wise sages of the
East have been dipping their fingers into the vast pool of mental
potential for over 5000 years and have refined mastery of the mind
into a science. Through a combination of meditative techniques and
breath control these yogis are able to withstand enormous amounts of
physical pain and go for extended periods without food or sleep. Such
is the power within every one of us. Mothers whose children have
fallen under cars have, in the heat of the moment, lifted the vehicle to
save their little ones. Seventy-year-old men have run marathons and
4
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
climbed mountains. There are simply no limits for a person who
accepts no limits.
The human mind and spirit can perform miracles if properly used
and conditioned for excellence. And yet most human minds remain
uncultivated, unexplored and unchallenged. On an average day, the
average person thinks about 60,000 thoughts. Even more startling is
the fact that 95% of those thoughts are the same as the ones you
thought the day before. Limited thinking patterns must be exploded
and you must exert your tremendous mind strength to develop the
habit of Limitless Thinking. Throw off the shackles of your old
thinking patterns. All successful people have come to realize that your
thoughts form your world and you truly cannot afford the luxury of
even one negative thought. The first step to a life full of wonders is to
see that your outside world begins with your inside world and every
single thought must be one that will take you farther along the path of
a perfect life. Your thoughts can create magic and every thing you have
ever wanted. Today’s thoughts build tomorrow’s dreams.
Mahatma Ghandi, a frail, weak man roused hundreds of millions
of his countrymen and brought down an empire with passive
resistance. And yet he started out as a very average lawyer with a small
law practice in South Africa. It was the pain of injustice which sparked
his determination to improve his world and like all high achievers,
Ghandi started to work on himself first. He started building his mental
toughness and creating enormous discipline in his life. At an early
stage, he realized a cardinal rule for life mastery: success on the outside
begins within. Armed with the self-knowledge that his cause was just,
this little man in the white loincloth led his country to independence.
Arnold Schwarzenegger was a young man when he entered the
gym for the first time. He had skinny legs, a shrunken chest and small
shoulders and came from a background where financial resources were
always slim. But Schwarzenegger’s inner resources were always
abundant. Shortly after his first bodybuilding session he turned to
another bodybuilder and promised he would be Mr. Universe in five
years. The bodybuilder laughed, but look at Schwarzenegger now. Here
is a man who refuses to accept limitations on what he can do and the
success that he will meet as he bounds through the rose garden of life.
5
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
As Napoleon Hill wrote in his wonderful book, Think and Grow Rich :
“whatever the mind of man can conceive and believe he can achieve.”
So an immediate challenge for you is to weave your new habit of
Limitless Thinking today. The mind is like a muscle, if it is weak it can
be conditioned for strength. If you currently worry too much or live in
the past, this negative habit can be erased through the exercises you
will learn in the 30 day program at the end of this book. At this point,
simply remember that you alone are responsible for every thought you
think every second of every minute of every day and if you do not like
it, you have the power to change it. MegaThinking!, the powerful
habit of thinking without limitations as to what you can do, have, feel
and enjoy, arrives through gradual and steady conditioning of the
mind. Positive thinking is pure habit and is not easy at first if you have
allowed weeds to take over the garden of your mind. But the prosperity
mindset can be developed as any other habit. Habit is like building a
cable: each day the action is taken, the cable becomes stronger until
the point is reached where it is unbreakable. This is the point that you
must and will reach with this program. As Emerson wrote: “what lies
behind us and what lies in front of us pales in comparison to what lies
within us.”
Now sit down and identify on a piece of paper those thoughts
and thinking patterns that have held you back and limited your life in
the past. Awareness of your limitations is the first stage in banishing
them from your mind. Effective people are precisely aware of their
weaknesses as these are the weakest links in the chain and must be
eliminated. What beliefs have kept you from success, happiness, love
and self-mastery? What habitual thoughts are keeping you from the
peace of mind, rich relationships and ideal health that you deserve?
Note them and make a decision to eradicate them from your mind. It
will be hard at first and you will wish to give up but with a little
persistance they will be erased.
Once you note the limiting thoughts and consciously remove
them from your consciousness, it is key that you replace them with an
alternative that energizes you, motivates you and fills your dreams with
hope and passion. This age-old principle of the East operates from the
fact that at any one instant, your mind can only hold one thought. If
6
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life 7
the thought on the picture screen of your mind is a disempowering
one, quickly replace it with a positive one. With time, the negative
thoughts will be few and far between since a great law of nature is that
positive always dominates the negative.
Picture yourself in your mind’s eye as you hope to be, having all
you ever dreamed of having. Make a “Dream List” of everything you
desire in your lifetime. It might seem silly and wasteful to think such
positive and powerful thoughts in your current circumstances but there
is phenomenal power in believing in positive mental pictures.
THE PROMISE OF MegaLiving!
Infinite riches are all around you if you will open your mental eyes
and behold the treasure house of infinity within you. There is a gold
mine within you from which you can extract everything you need to
live life gloriously, joyously and abundantly.
Joseph Murphy, Ph.D.,
The Power of Your Subconscious Mind
The MegaLiving! 30 Day Program for Life Mastery is not a fad or
quick-fix course that will sustain your interest for a couple of weeks
and then take its place in the closet with all the other personal
development manuals you have bought in the past. It is a detailed
piece of research containing secret gems for life mastery prepared by
studying the success strategies of both the East and the West for over
a ten year period. You have dynamite in your hands whether you
realize it or not.
MegaLiving! is a complete program for the transformation of
your mind, body and character starting today. You have a golden
opportunity to be a true master of yourself and your existence. You can
make your world the bed of roses that you have always dreamed of, the
decision is yours alone. If you want this kind of a magical existence,
the golden key is to remember that your mind is the sole author of your
success. If you master your thoughts, you master your mind. Once you
master your mind, you master your life and when you master your life
you master your destiny.
Past experiences, failures or trouble spots have nothing to do
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
with the potential that exists within you. If anything, past failure has
made you far wiser and stronger than you would have been without the
benefit of the experience. Pain is a teacher. Today, and every day, take
complete charge and responsibility for your life and all that is in it. If
you don’t have enough money and want more, decide to make changes
and take determined action to realize your dreams. If you want better
health and more energy, make a decision from your very core to
achieve greater vitality. If you want ideal relationships, dedicate
yourself to becoming the kind of person that sustains such bonds. But
it will not just come to you by chance. If you keep doing the same things
every day, you are certain to get the same results every day. Winners are
no different from less successful people, they have just learned to do
different things that give them their fabulous results. In the chapters
which follow and in the 30 Day Program for Life Mastery at the end of
this book, you will learn precisely the things that the peak performers
do to create rich, fulfilling lives.
Let me ask you a few questions and please take the time to
answer them (doers are achievers):
Question Answer
Do you want to be a champion in life?
Do you want more mental power?
Do you want perfect health?
Do you want more energy and vitality?
Do you want to add fun to your life?
Do you want to fulfill your dreams?
Do you want more serenity in life?
Do you want more adventure in life?
Do you want a powerful character?
Do you want to live longer?
Do you seek self-mastery?
If you answered “YES!” to any one of these questions, this
program will be invaluable to you and your quest for a perfect life.
MegaLiving! blends the latest physical mastery and healthy lifestyle
techniques with ancient strategies of the East for mental conditioning
and character-building to offer a fully balanced owner’s manual for
8
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life 9
your mind, body and spirit. It is a holistic approach to personal growth
that, if applied daily and with sincere conviction, will ensure that you
will soar to heights higher than you ever dreamed possible. Thousands
of people have already used this program to profoundly (and quickly)
improve the quality of their lives and so can you. Ignite your desire and
stoke the fire in your belly for you will soon be MegaLiving!
Once you truly commit yourself to self-mastery and lifelong
success, you will appreciate how easy and fun it is. Small victories lead
to large victories. Once you start feeling more vital and energetic, you
will start achieving even more because you cannot do good unless you
feel good. This leads to another primary principle of successful living:
we are happiest when we are growing and feeling that we are contributing in
some way. The purpose of life is a life of purpose and we all, deep down,
want to leave a legacy of some form or another. When you dedicate
yourself to tapping into the extraordinary potential of your mind, body
and spirit, you set powerful forces into play and things start to happen
in every aspect of your life. And when you know that you are
improving, your confidence and enthusiasm starts to blossom. And
when your enthusiasm starts to blossom, your passion and energy
blooms. And when your energy starts to explode you start to create
opportunity after opportunity for success in your life. Perhaps the great
philosopher of India, Patanjali said it best: “When you are inspired by
some great purpose, some extraordinary project, all of your thoughts
break their bonds, your mind transcends limitations, your
consciousness expands in every direction and you find yourself in a
new great and wonderful world. Dormant forces, faculties and talents
become alive and you discover yourself to be a greater person by far
than you ever dreamed yourself to be.”
The chapters which follow and the MegaLiving! 30 Day Program
for Life Mastery will bring very dramatic results in each of the areas
that matter most in your life. You will view the world differently. No
longer will you feel that you never have enough time to do the things
you love to do. By applying the skills you will learn, you will shape your
circumstances and achieve the things that are important to you. No
longer will you feel like a leaf floating in the Fall wind, with no control
of your time and your life. By using the straightforward techniques
offered, you will attain a level of personal effectiveness that might
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
startle you. The essential point to understand as you continue to read
is that you are no different from any of the peak performers before you.
You have the “right stuff.” If others have achieved results which you
want, they are simply doing things a little differently. Perhaps they are
running their minds a little more effectively or managing their time
more meticulously. Perhaps they are using the power of the knowledge
around us more diligently or living a more disciplined, principled life.
Once you start to apply the tools for lifelong success which follow, you
will also see the results you have hoped for. You will understand the
importance of self-mastery and the tremendous opportunities that live
in every moment. You will appreciate that every day is a miracle and
life is a special path that we walk on. It can be a nirvana or a nightmare
- the choice is yours and yours alone. As British poet, William
Wordsworth wrote: “All which we behold is full of blessings.”
EXCELLING WITH THE PROGRAM
AND IGNITING YOUR LIFE
For the purposes of action nothing is more useful than narrowness
of thought combined with energy of will.
Henri Frederic Amiel
There are no shortcuts to the success and pleasure you will receive
when MegaLiving! becomes your habit. “Patience, the essential
quality of a man,” wrote Kwai-Koo-Tsu. To get the exceptional results
this program will deliver, the following points are important:
Follow the program daily: Reserve judgment on the success of the
techniques mentioned for 30 days. MegaLiving! blends the most
effective ideas for self-improvement from the West with little-known
philosophies of the East. Many of the mental and physical mastery
tools you will learn have been used by the sages of the Orient for over
5000 years. Some exercises designed to slow aging, tap your energy
reserves and build mental clarity come from an intense study of the
habits of the yogis living high in the Himalayan mountains of India.
These methods might seem novel at first until you experience their
remarkable benefits personally. Other techniques for personal
effectiveness on issues such as time management and relationship-
10
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life 11
building will seem more familiar to Western readers. Do not become
discouraged if you do not see results on the first day. Studies have
shown that it takes at least 21 days for perceptible changes to appear
in your life when you are trying to make improvements. Each day you
follow the program, you will feel better, perform better and achieve
more. By making small, daily changes on a gradual and consistent
basis, your enthusiasm will increase as will the visible results. Small
victories always lead to large victories.
A missed day following the principles which immediately follow
and the techniques in the 30 day program at the end of this book does
not mean you will remain where you are. Letting a day slip by without
doing something, no matter how small, to improve the quality of your
life will mean that you are falling backwards. Again, do not miss even
one day of this revolutionary program - daily study and application of
its principles is key to dramatic success and the conditioning of your
mind, body and character. Some days will be harder than others.
Discipline is built by following through on these “low energy” days.
Soon they will be few and far between. This is the nature of will.
Work hard on this life mastery program: This is your best chance to
reshape your world and become an elite performer on the playing field
of life. Use the SuccessLog provided at the end to chart your daily
progress, your thoughts, your aspirations and successes. Throughout
the day, review the principles and use the strategies provided. On the
subway, in the car and in the shower, mentally repeat your
commitment to enhancement of all areas of your life.
Publicize your commitment to MegaLiving!: Tell your family and
friends that you will follow through with the program and that they
will notice dramatic changes in you in the future. Inform them of your
goals. Make a public declaration of your commitment to being the very
best you can be. This is an excellent way to get leverage and
motivation on the dreams and desires you hold. No one wants to look
like a failure or like a person with no willpower and persistence. A
little pressure will stimulate you to positive action.
The key to success with the principles of MegaLiving! is to run
your own race. Do not compare yourself and your progress to others.
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
You are special and have your own gifts and virtues. As the ancient
Eastern proverb says: “There is nothing noble about being superior to
some other person. The true nobility lies in being superior to your
previous self.”
By implementing the ideas you will learn daily and making small,
consistent changes, your personal energy and desire will snowball and
soon take on enormous dimensions. By charting the progress in the
SuccessLog at the very end of this book, your interest and enthusiasm
will increase. And by publicizing your commitment to the course, you
will get tremendous leverage for your ultimate aspiration: a perfect life
and total self-mastery.
12
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
YOUR COMMITMENT TO SELF-MASTERY : KAIZEN
Kaizen means constant and never ending improvement in Japanese.
There is no pursuit more noble nor important than the pursuit of selfimprovement.
As Confucius said many years ago: “good people
strengthen themselves ceaselessly.” Consistent and constant
improvement in all areas is essential to reaching your true potential.
The personal trademark of almost every high achiever and successful
person is a dedication to daily improvement in both their personal and
professional lives. From Ben Franklin to Mahatma Ghandi, from
Martin Luther King Jr. to Ivan Lendl and from Nelson Mandela to
Mother Teresa, effective people do things daily to advance confidently
in the direction of their goals and dreams.
You must also apply the Kaizen principle on a daily basis to
condition your mind to peak performance. It has been said that the
mind is a terrible master but a wonderful servant. By seeking to
improve your mind and condition it to excellence of thought, this
wonderful servant will most certainly bring you all the peace,
prosperity and joy you now search for.
Study any great success story and you will undoubtedly learn of
13
Man is made or unmade by himself. In the armoury of thought he
forges the weapons by which he destroys himself. He also fashions the
tools with which he builds for himself heavenly mansions of joy,
strength and peace. By the right choice, and true application of
thought, man ascends to divine perfection. By the abuse and wrong
application of thought, he descends below the level of the beast.
James Allen, As a Man Thinketh
CHAPTER TWO
Your Mind & its Unlimited Potential
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
their commitment to Kaizen. They will be dedicated to small, daily
improvements in the key areas of their lives and becoming the very
best that they could be. Personal mastery is like a bank account, call it
the Personal Excellence Account. By improving daily, whether it is by
spending some time exercising, reading, visualizing or forging better
relationships, you are making regular deposits into your account. After
only one month, for example, you will have improved the richness and
quality of your world by at least 30%. And after a single year, your life
will have improved by more than 365% (factoring in the power of
compound interest). But when you sleep too much, worry too much,
watch television too much or eat too much, you make withdrawals in
your Personal Excellence Account.
Walt Stack, an 80 year-old man who runs the entire length of the
Golden Gate Bridge in California every day, come rain or shine, was
asked how he kept his teeth from chattering on those cold mornings.
“I leave them in my locker,” he replied wryly. To be great you must act
great. Nothing can stop a person who refuses to be stopped. Yet most
people spend their entire lives struggling for a little happiness against
a current of problems or difficulties, hoping to see a small glimpse of
blue sky against the mass of dark clouds which seem to blanket their
lives. These people never realize the magic secret of true happiness:
one must rise above the clouds to see the blue sky rather than
constantly trying to push them aside.
Clouds will always be there but anyone who conditions their
mind and body to the correct degree will rise above any cloud to live
with lasting bliss in the blue sky of life. Dedicate yourself to such selfenhancement
each and every day of your life. Become a champion.
Remember, happiness is a method of travelling through this wonderful
world and not a destination, a place you arrive at in the future. A time
will definitely come when your personal power takes you to a place
where you have real freedom and joy. This is a place where all dreams
come true. This is the place of self-mastery. This is a place called
MegaLiving!
Excellence in Personal Mastery
Does your mind sometimes feel like a bowl of pudding? Are you
easily distracted or pulled away from important tasks that require
14
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
powerful thought and concentration? Do you lack will-power and
discipline and get into the same limiting, destructive thought patterns
over and over? If so, you must exert your personal influence (which
may currently be dormant inside of you) to exercise and condition
your mind. As you learned earlier, the mind is similar to the muscles of
the body: if you do not use it and give it a good workout every day, it
will become flabby. A flabby mind allows weak thoughts to enter.
Weak thoughts drain your energy and limit your actions. Limited,
unproductive actions prevent you from being the best and attaining all
of your desires.
Sir Issac Newton, the father of classical physics had an
exceptional ability to concentrate on a particular problem from
morning until it was solved late in the evening. This mental giant said
that “if I have done the public any service, it is due to patient
thought.” What most people do not realize is that anyone can enhance
the level of their mental functioning. You can become more mentally
agile, improve your memory well beyond its current level and become
a smarter mental athlete. You can train yourself to go weeks without
even one negative thought (William James said: “the essence of genius
is knowing what to overlook.”). But you must go into training like any
serious athlete. You must place your mind on a regime designed to fire
up the brain and dramatically reshape it. The MegaLiving! program
will do this for you if you follow it strictly and passionately. While the
mental aerobics listed in the 30 day MegaLiving! program and the
brain-building exercises appearing in the course take you to new
intellectual heights, the important idea to hammer home at this point
is that you must set aside one hour each day, at the very least, to renew
and revitalize your mind, body and spirit. There are 168 hours in a
week, can you not find an hour a day to take care of the very tools that
will bring you the success that you desire so much? You may say that
you are very busy and cannot afford to take this time off. In reality, you
cannot afford to miss this essential period to sharpen your mind,
condition your body and feed your spirit. As the German poet Johann
von Goethe said: “Things which matter most should never be at the
mercy of things which matter least.”
What should you do in this one hour “rekindling” session that is
so very important? The answer is clear: practice self-mastery, Kaizen.
15
16 MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
Although the program lists particulars, what is key is that you spend
some time on each of the following, each day (rise an hour earlier or
do it in the evening, it will be one of the most magical decisions you
make):
1. Personal Development
Personal development is really any activity that gives you
knowledge on improving your life and all its elements. Personal
development includes self-renewal and stress reduction. Your daily
time for personal development could involve reading an inspirational
book like The Power of Positive Thinking or Think and Grow Rich. It may
involve the exceptionally valuable habit of listening to motivational
tapes while you drive to work or sit on the bus. Or it could be digesting
a hot book on diet and health or simply watching the sun rise. The key
is that you start to tap the incredible amount of information that is out
there on improving your life.
It is amazing to learn of the strategies and techniques available
which would do wonders for most peoples’ lives if they only knew
about them. All we need is a single powerful idea to change our lives
for the better. What distinguishes successes from failures is that the
successes constantly thirst for new ideas and knowledge. Successful
people are hungry for anything that will give them an edge in life’s
wonderful game. The answers to a life of perfection and bliss are out
there and as abundant as the air we breathe. Be open to them and be
on the lookout for them at all times.
Readers are leaders and you will be a true leader once you get into
the habit being devoted to personal development on a daily basis. Miss
a meal but don’t miss your daily personal improvement time.
2. Physical Fitness
You should spend at least 30 minutes daily cultivating the perfect
health which lies deep inside the temple of your body. Daily exercise,
as you have heard so many times, is one of the most effective ways to
arrive at the state of personal excellence. If someone said he would
give you the secret of longevity, super energy and serenity, you would
do almost anything to get it. Well the secret is yours now: exercise
every day and you will see a vitality enter your life that will surely
change it very dramatically.
A little exercise every day will keep you more relaxed, improve
your concentration, your productivity, your creativity and dramatically
improve your inner world. With the abundance of energy a fitness
program surely provides, you will be able to take those positive steps in
the direction of your dreams. Swim, run, walk, take up karate, learn
how to water ski, play squash, bicycle, garden, get some fresh air,
rollerblade, have fun at aerobics but get out of that life-sapping habit
of sitting on a couch and watching TV all night!
How will you feel when your friends say you look marvelous and
years younger? How will you feel when you have the stamina to work
all day, come home to laugh and play with your family and later, after
a brisk walk around your neighborhood, slip off to your den to spend a
couple of hours on an activity that will really make your life great.
Trust me, physical excellence precedes mental excellence.
3. Relaxation and Personal Renewal Time
The body and mind are like a high performance racing car. It will
perform at its peak if it remains cool and well-oiled. Relaxation is
essential for the body and without it, the body slowly deteriorates and
loses its vitality. “The soul that moves in the world of the senses and
yet keeps the senses in harmony... finds rest in quietness,” notes the
ancient Indian text The Bhagavad Gita. The body and mind are
intimately linked and if your body is tense, your mind will be tense,
unfocused and agitated. Stress hampers your creativity and intellect in
very serious ways. When you are under stress, you are prevented from
being your best and tapping your real potential.
A while back I was in a grocery store and saw a mother pushing
a screaming baby. I overheard the mother saying “Don’t yell Jennifer,
don’t scream Jennifer, be calm Jennifer.” As I passed by the mother I
said, “excuse me Madam, I can’t tell you how impressed I am with the
way you spoke to your baby.” She looked at me and then smiled, “I am
Jennifer.”
We all have our own strategies for stress control. The key is that
you have one that works well and use it on a daily basis - even if only
for ten minutes. It is essential to spend time every single day on
relaxation and quieting your mind. It will be the best decision you ever
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life 17
18 MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
made and will lead to more effectiveness in all the important areas of
your life. Saying you don’t have time for a daily period to relax,
meditate and unwind is like saying you do not have time to stop for gas
because you are too busy driving - eventually it will catch up with you.
Every peak performer, from Michael Jordan and Wayne Gretzky
to the President of the United States recognizes the value of a calm,
disciplined and relaxed mind. In the East, a daily period of silence is as
common as eating - everyone does it from a very young age. So should
you. Exceptional serenity, mental clarity and will-power can be
achieved through a daily period of relaxation and renewal. Ancient
deep breathing techniques from India and China, the disciplines of
stretching and yoga, meditation, contact with nature, self-massage and
mental tranquility exercises are all part of the MegaLiving! 30 day
program which you will explore later. For now, appreciate the 17th
century philosopher Robert Burton’s sage advice: “a quiet mind cureth
all.” Relax your mind and body daily, jump start your life and soar to
your highest potential.
THE NATURE OF THE MIND :
THE ULTIMATE SUPERPOWER
Thought is a vital, living force, the most vital, subtle and irresistible
force that exists in the universe. ... Thoughts are living things.
Swami Sivananda
To unleash the tremendous power reserves which currently sleep
within you, it is critical that you first become aware of the nature of
the mind. In life, you are given an owner’s manual for everything but
that which is most important to you - the ten pound mass which rests
between your shoulders. In school, we are taught how to do complex
Algebra and the capitals of far away lands that we may never visit.
What about the nature of our greatest gift, our mind? The first step to
personal mastery and successful living is to learn how to run your mind
like a winner. The second step is to understand once and for all that
your mind can create magic in your life if you only let it. The only
limitations in your life are those that you consciously set. When you
think without limits and dream great dreams, wonderful things happen
and powerful forces are set into play.
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life 19
To run your mind like a peak performer, study the following 10 Golden
Rules for Mental Mastery:
1. The level of your success is determined by what you think
every second of every minute of every day. Your thoughts shape
your world - mental mastery is the DNA of life mastery. Today’s
thoughts will serve to build your dreams of tomorrow.
2. Your outer world reflects your inner world. If you want to change
your life, you must start by changing the thoughts you put into
your mind. Success on the outside begins with success on the
inside.
3. You alone are responsible for what you think. Most importantly,
you can change the way you think and remove any negative
thinking habits by the daily practice of mental discipline and
conditioning. Thinking patterns are habits and, like all habits,
they can be changed when you strongly desire to change them
and take concrete action towards your goal.
4. A supersuccessful mindset does not happen in a day. You have to
work hard on it just like any other worthy pursuit in life. But with
30 days of daily, concentrated practice, you will note astonishing
changes in the way you think, feel and act.
5. One of the great keys to a better life is to change your self-image.
Our self-image is determined by the mental pictures we
constantly run through our minds. Our minds work through
pictures and when we change the pictures to show what we really
want in our lives and what we really can achieve, our self-image
will also improve dramatically. This leads to greater confidence
and belief in our personal abilities and power. Goals are then
easily achieved and the ordinary becomes the extraordinary.
6. Anything you faithfully and honestly believe you can achieve,
you will achieve if you take persistent action in that direction.
Constantly keep your dreams at the front of your mind. Repeat
them all day, every day. Never, let go of them. When you
concentrate all your mental and physical energy on a single
purpose, dormant forces that you never knew you had are
sparked into action. This is the secret of genius: finding what you
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
love to do and then spending all your time doing it. As one wise
person has said: “once you find what you truly love doing, you
will never have to work another day in your life.” People with far
less than you have achieved great feats.
7. The Law of Attraction is the dominant law of the mind. What
you think about and believe is what you attract into your life.
People who are happy and motivated attract such people into
their world. People with a positive expectation of super success
will attract opportunities to allow them to arrive at this
destination.
8. Your subconscious mind plays a particularly great role in the
outcome of your life. You must learn how to use it for maximum
achievement. Again, mental pictures and verbalization play a big
role in stimulating your subconscious mind.
9. Your mind has the capacity to hold only one thought in its focus
at any one time. Using this knowledge, you must ensure that
each thought is a valuable and positive one. If a negative,
disempowering thought does enter, quickly replace it with a good
one. As you develop the habit of thinking useful, energizing
thoughts, weak ones will no longer hold any power.
10. There is a Success Mechanism inside your mind which craves
positive stimulation. It awaits your instructions. When you
realize this and start setting great goals for yourself it will spring
to life and seize all opportunities get you to where you want to go.
Scientific researchers are discovering the virtually limitless
capacity of the brain and that we generally use only about 25% of its
potential on any given day at best. Human beings are designed to have
perfect health and perfect minds but, during the course of our lives, we
learn to sabotage ourselves and exclude perfection.
As a baby, you were in the ideal performance state to achieve
excellence. Did you fear public speaking, starting a successful business
or skydiving? Of course not. As a child, you dreamed of becoming a
movie star, an astronaut or a president. We all had such great dreams.
Some of us wanted to be business tycoons or to lead countries. Others
wanted to be sports heroes or have ideal family lives with supportive,
20
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
loving relationships. What happened? What happened to your
aspirations and deep hopes?
You were exposed to people and beliefs that taught you that some
things were beyond your ability. You were told that regular people did
not move into the White House and you best focus on making a living
and paying the bills because that was what life was really about. So
gradually, the spark of a limitless reality died. Gradually, your world
view shrunk from imagining the thrills of greatness to paying the bills
and cutting the grass. But you can return to the winning mindset and
rekindle the fire that lies deep inside of you. To do this, it is essential
to dedicate yourself and your energies to lifelong success. Forget about
past failures or problems. True changes in the quality of your life do not
take a year to appear. Profound improvements in the way your feel, in
your energy levels, in your financial resources and in the richness of
your relationships do not take six months, nor six weeks nor six days
to happen. Real change takes only one second - the time it takes for
you to make a concrete decision from the very core of your heart that
your life is more than the sum of your present circumstances.
It has also been said that you can change your life with a single
idea - if it is the right one. Lasting success in life surely requires desire,
persistence and practice as visible changes will not come in a week or
ten days. But they certainly will come as long as you take action now!
You can transform your life and have everything you ever wanted
when it happens. As the age-old expression says, “sow a thought, reap
an action, sow an action, reap a habit, sow a habit, reap a character,
sow a character, reap a destiny!”
Also appreciate the exceptional power of focus. Have you ever
noticed that when you buy a new car it suddenly seems that everyone
in the world has the same one? Whenever you hear a new name, it is
suddenly everywhere. This is the tremendous power of focus. The first
step to excellence is awareness and your focus is the laser beam of
awareness. What you focus on shapes your life. Your thoughts form
your world. Once you make a clear decision to focus on something,
opportunities seem to appear from out of the blue. For example, if you
focus carefully on seeking knowledge for personal development, you
will start to see that information on this subject is everywhere; you
21
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
simply did not notice it because you were focused on other things.
Another example is in your own home. Walk into your favorite room
and look at every object in the room. You will notice things that you
may not have noticed in the past because you never really took the
time to concentrate on them.
Many people dislike their jobs or their relationships simply
because they focus on the negative aspects of each. They don’t like
their boss and are not thrilled by the work and continually focus on
these points until a negative association is formed. But things change
when you simply ask them if their offices are comfortable, if they have
a good pension plan, whether they enjoy the good friends they have
made through work or whether the money is pretty good. Every
experience has many positive elements. Every moment is a celebration
- the winners on the playing field of life know this. If you focus on the
good, you will excel and reach higher planes. This is one of the most
important success secrets. If you dwell on the negative aspects of life,
you will get nowhere fast. Get into the habit of positive focusing today.
You will reap huge rewards. And remember the words of H.G. Wells:
“Man must not allow the clock and the calendar to blind him to the
fact that each moment of his life is a miracle and a mystery.”
Once you make the decision to focus on a perfect life and master
all of its components, you will find signs of excellence and positivity
everywhere. This is where knowledge comes in. Once you are on the
road to self-mastery and are focusing on all that is good in your world
and that which is required to make it even better, knowledge will
catapult you to the highest level. When an unquenchable thirst for
knowledge is cultivated, you start to see the abundant strategies,
techniques and ideas that will get you to where you want to go.
Remember this ancient truth: you can accomplish anything in
your life with the right knowledge. Knowledge provides the means for
achieving all objectives and the training to meet all goals. Knowledge
provides answers which if focused on consistently and applied
correctly lead to mastery in every life facet. If you want to become a
multi-millionaire in three years, no matter how much you pray and
think positively, it will not happen if you do not take action. But if you
set a goal (i.e., $3 million in 3 years), develop a plan (create a hot
22
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
product) and then seek out all available knowledge on the product
itself, the market, others who have succeeded in business, the mindset
of winners and other such topics, you will quickly realize the strategies
that others have followed to make millions. This will give you
thoughts and beliefs on which you must focus to meet with success.
If you want to achieve any goal, the path is simple: seek out all
available knowledge and then apply it thoroughly. Find someone who
has achieved that goal, ask her how she did it, what books she read,
what thoughts did she think, which people did she talk to and what
did she do when she woke up in the morning and throughout the day.
Accept a fundamental success principle: you have all the “right stuff”
and anything anyone else has done you can also do. You simply need
to learn the things they did to get their results. This technique is
known as Success Imaging. You must become a mirror image of the
person who has succeeded in the activity you desire excellence in - be
it running a country or a local bakery. You must emulate their
physiology (walk like them, talk like them, eat like them) and their
psychology (think like them and react like them). You must learn their
habits, read the books they read, study their diets and learn their
philosophies and strategies.
By taking these steps, you are bound to get the same results that
they have achieved. Become an explorer in the galaxy of knowledge
that is available to anyone with a library card. You can learn any
language, skill or concept with the right knowledge and proper
coaching. Get into the daily habit of talking to new people and
tapping their minds. Ask question after question. Read new books and
listen to tapes on the subjects which are the center of your focus.
Knowledge is power! You will soon gain unshakable confidence and
unstoppable momentum.
Just as a butterfly must shed her cocoon before she flies out into
the deep blue sky, you too must make an energetic effort to shed the
cocoon of limitations that has enveloped your life and prevented you
from self-mastery and life excellence. And no matter how successful
you presently are, how happy you are and how much wealth you
currently possess, there is more out there for you. Bill Gates of
Microsoft fame became a billionaire in his early thirties, J.F.K.
23
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
President of the United States in his forties. You have all of the
qualities of such people, yours may not be developed to their true
potential. Shatter the beliefs which cause you to think that you are not
well educated enough, intelligent enough, fit enough, rich enough or
happy enough to make this life your masterpiece. This minute, make
the ultimate decision of your life and become aware of all those
thoughts and beliefs that you have allowed to hamper your
performance. Get ready for the mind-body training that is the essence
of this program. Get ready to expand the limits of your mind and
rekindle your spirit. Get ready for the success you richly deserve.
DISCIPLINE & WILL-POWER :
THE GOLDEN KEYS TO THE GATES OF SELF-MASTERY
Man is still responsible. He must turn the alloy of modern experience
into the steel of mastery and character. His success lies not with the
stars but with himself. He must carry on the fight of self-correction
and discipline. He must fight mediocrity as sin and live against the
imperative of life’s highest ideal.
Frank Curtis Williams
The most important initial ingredients of self-mastery and life
excellence are discipline and will-power. With them, you will have
taken the first step to a Perfect Life. They are the qualities that ensure
your success. With discipline and mental persistence, you will find the
means to your ends. You will have the personal toughness to apply the
principle of Kaizen and to develop yourself to reach your goals.
Discipline allows you to follow the MegaLiving! program daily to
unleash the sleeping potential inside of you. It provides you with the
character strength to set aside watching the television and other time
wasting activities in favor of those that will truly make a lasting
difference in your life. Discipline and will-power allow you to ensure
that the things which matter most in your life are never at the mercy
of those that matter the least.
The Magic of Discipline for Life-Mastery
There are 168 hours in a week. Discipline and mental toughness
ensure that this time is well spent and your life retains the balance of
physical fitness, mental conditioning, character-building, professional
24
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
pursuits, social activities and pure adventure that will foster its
greatness. Most importantly, the development of discipline ensures
that you are always focused on your life goals and moving powerfully
and consistently towards them. Erasmus said, “a nail is driven out by
another nail; habit is overcome by habit.” The heart of discipline is
indeed habit. Discipline and will-power, like the biceps, are muscles to
be conditioned and built up. Success in any endeavour requires a
focused mind and regular application. Without the power that
discipline brings, no dream can be realized. Without will-power, you
become a victim to the evils of procrastination, laziness and sloth.
Discipline and will-power deliver you to the highest level of
living possible and though it might seem difficult to develop at the
outset, once these muscles are consistently exercised into a habit,
stunning results appear and once-hard tasks become easy. With
discipline you can raise your standards of physical fitness, tap into
amazing reserves of knowledge, start and finish major tasks, control
your diet, triple your energy level, build your character to achieve a
more fulfilling life and enhance your personal relations. Discipline will
shape the tremendously important habit of mind control and positive
thinking and free you from worry. Discipline will dramatically improve
your confidence levels and your productivity as you start to put first
things first.
Without discipline, or at least a clear desire to build it, you are
lost and are destined to be the servant of your mind rather than having
your mind serve you. Instead of mental toughness and agility,
disempowering thoughts will creep into your brain freely, zapping you
of your personal power and redirecting your attention from worthwhile
goals to useless activities that might feel fun but will offer no value in
the long run. Without will-power, you might eat too much, worry too
much and sleep too much. Study the lives of Ghandi, Washington,
Mother Teresa, Helen Keller and Bruce Lee and you will be studying
will-power in action.
Success on the outside begins with success on the inside. If you
want to be more effective at the office, if you want to be a better
mother or father, or a better citizen in your community, start with your
inner world and cultivate your inner resources. You cannot do great
25
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
things unless you feel great. You cannot lead a corporation or a team
unless you have learned to lead yourself first. Life management begins
with self-management and a key ingredient of self-management is
refining your will-power muscles.
One of the best personal growth objectives anyone can set is to
develop their discipline. H.P. Liddon said: “ what we do upon some
great occasion will probably depend on what we already are; and what
we are will be the result of previous years of self-discipline.” In his
excellent book, Will-Power, Raymond De Saint-Laurent writes that
“the man of character is one who selects a reasonable objective and
never gives up pursuing it so long as he has not reached his goal.” Once
you are aware of how to use your will, no dream will elude you. Your
mind will not be swayed like a leaf in the Fall wind. Once you have a
worthy desire, you will exert a totally concentrated mind and effort on
it. People will not move you from the path of success nor be able to
discourage your aspirations. Here are some of the essential points to
note about will-power:
i) Winners Are Disciplined! Every person who has met with great
success in life has had an abundance of discipline and will-power. Your
world will change with these exceptional qualities but you must first
understand that they are currently dormant within you. These
priceless gems simply need to be polished and refined before they bring
you riches that you could never imagine.
ii) Use Your Will! The secret to conditioning your discipline/
will-power muscles is incredibly simple: use them or lose them! Nature
is consistent in its principles. To increase your biceps, exert them and
push them to the limit regularly. Soon they will grow stronger. Exert
and push your memory to remember more, it too will grow strong.
Exert and push your imagination. Visualize the perfect you and feel
that you are that person. You will soon grow strong and become that
image. This is the way of your discipline/will-power muscles also. The
key is to push them and exert them. They will definitely blossom
beyond your expectations.
iii) Have Big Hopes and Think Good Thoughts! Even if you think
you are weak, lethargic and apathetic, remember the essential truth
26
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
that there is a sparkling spring of will-power bubbling within you.
With proper cultivation the spring will explode into an unstoppable
current!
iv) Become a Will-Power Warrior! The MegaLiving! program teaches
you how to wage war against impulses that drain your energy and keep
your limitless potential at bay. You must examine yourself carefully and
become aware of the disempowering thoughts that you have
conditioned into your way of thinking. Then you must stop
considering them and repeat to yourself, over and over, that it is these
thoughts that are keeping you from ideal health, perfect wealth and a
truly magical existence.
One of the most common “diseases” in our modern world is
fatigue. People rush to work, are busy all day, run home to have a quick
meal and drop into their favorite couch only to doze off in front of
their television. The most common excuse for not doing something
important has become, “but Honey, I was too tired.” People who once
had lofty ambitions about becoming famous and changing the world
for the better now crave nothing more than a night with eight hours
of good sleep. Our society is paralyzed by its tired citizens who lack the
energy to achieve what they need to achieve in order to make their
lives memorable. Would you be shocked to learn that, generally, the
“fatigue disease” is nothing more than an illusion? To illustrate this
essential truth, think about the last time you were at the office or at
home reading something boring and dull. Think of how you really
disliked having to plod through the material and think of how tired
you felt reading it. Your head started to bob and you actually nodded
off a few times. If only you could have a little nap you thought. Then,
you were interrupted by a ringing phone or a friendly colleague who
dropped by. All of a sudden, the drowsiness and fatigue vanished. You
felt alert and vibrant again. You were really not tired at all but, rather,
had created this state because you were not interested in the subject.
More importantly, you had not developed the habit of disciplining
yourself to push on through the material in spite of the drowsy
impulses.
Once you start to discipline your mind, it will work wonders for
you. Mental and physical fatigue will be a thing of the past. Worry and
27
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
negative thinking is the greatest cause of fatigue known. A wandering
mind will do more to make you tired than a 10 mile run. The mind is
like a thousand volt battery. It starts the day fully charged and loaded
with of energy. Then, as the day goes by, 100 volts are lost worrying
about the bills. Another 200 volts are lost thinking about some past
event that is really not important and that you know you should not
even think about. Another 300 volts are lost by daydreaming about a
vacation that you want to take but cannot afford. Soon all your energy
is gone and you feel like you need a rest.
The first step to eliminating mental fatigue is to control every
thought in your mind. Make certain that each one is an optimistic,
positive one. Then, with the habit of discipline, start to realize that
you have an incredible energy reserve that is simply waiting to be
tapped. Realize that the fatigue is your own creation. Break the habit
of fatigue. Toss it away. When the tired feeling starts to take hold, keep
focused on the task at hand. Just as a runner gets a second wind on a
long run, your mind will get a second wind if you exert your discipline
muscles and stick with the job you are doing. It will not be easy at first.
But you must be strong and not seek to escape the task you may be
finding dull and unpleasant. Soon your discipline will take over.
Things you had trouble doing will become easy. Larger goals become
attainable and your confidence soars. You feel mentally stronger and
happier.
It has been said that successes do those things that failures don’t
like to do even though they also find them unpleasant. One of the
world’s greatest success tips is that all of life’s happiness comes from
achieving goals. When you look back on your life, what will make you
happy will be the great things you have done, the superb family you
raised, the prosperous business you created, the places you travelled to
and the exciting books you have read. You will not look back and find
a sense of accomplishment in the television shows you watched or in
the weekend mornings that you slept until noon. Your life will be
elevated by one thing and one thing alone: achievement. This does
not mean that you must strive to make 10 million dollars or build a
house in Bermuda. Achievement and life success can appear in peace
of mind and a well-developed spiritual life. The key is simply to
28
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
achieve. Discipline and will-power will make you a success. Cultivate
them and treat them as your golden gifts.
THE FEELGOOD PRINCIPLE & BELIEF SYSTEMS :
UNLEASHING VITALITY
Be not afraid of life. Believe that it is worth living, and your belief
will help create that fact.
William James
The MegaLiving! program is far more than simple positive thinking. It
is a holistic program designed to raise your life to its highest level at
every facet. Over 30 days, you will learn the secrets to unleashing the
exceptional powers of your mind and supermemory, strategies for
maintaining the ideal health state, techniques to build a stronger, more
productive character full of integrity and an abundance/prosperity
mentality.
If you take anything away from this revolutionary course,
remember this one enduring truth known as the FeelGood Principle:
everything you have ever done in your life, every action you have ever
taken has been a direct result of your powerful need to feel good. What
you focus on throughout the day, what you eat and drink, the people
you associate with and the books you read all arise from your desire to
feel good. The evil of procrastination comes about through the
application of the FeelGood Principle: you derive more pleasure by
sitting on the couch doing nothing than becoming physically fit or
finishing that report for work that could really give your career the
boost it deserves.
When you eat too much, sleep too much or smoke too much you
are applying the FeelGood Principle. You are taking these negative
steps because they make you feel good. Think of all the things in your
life that you know you should not be doing. Why do you continue?
Awareness is the first step to excellence and once you become aware
of the importance of the FeelGood concept you will have a particularly
strong tool for transforming your behaviour and world.
List on a piece of paper all the activities that are preventing
success in your life. Do you fight with others, worry too much, see the
29
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
obstacles in life rather than the endless possibilities? Are you scared to
exercise? All limiting activities can be changed in a relatively short
period of time with the correct strategies. Perhaps the most powerful
tool is simply to start applying the Feelgood Principle for positive
rather than negative ends.
Here is the technique to make powerful, lasting transformations in your life:
Step 1: The Decision
Today make the decision that you need to change your
behaviour. It has caused you too much pain in the past and it must stop
now! Graphically think about and visualize the hurt that this action
has caused you, referring to specific incidents and lost opportunities.
Now write down your decision to dramatically improve and tape it
next to your bedside. Read it ten times before you go to bed and when
you first wake up - it will slowly start to affect your subconscious mind
which ultimately governs all of our actions.
Step 2: The Challenge Technique
Now that you are committed to change, and maybe have told all
your family and friends so that you have some positive pressure on you,
you must start the re-conditioning process. When the first thought of
the negative behaviour enters your mind, isolate it and “challenge” the
thinking process by anything unique: a silly sound that you make, a
bizarre word like “ookabooka!” or a pinch to your leg. This may sound
strange but it will have the highly important impact of breaking the
disempowering thought pattern that is holding you back. An ageless
law of nature is that the positive will always overcome the negative
with time. Once you challenge negative, thoughts and behaviours
which are holding you back from all that you deserve, they will soon
realize that they are unwelcome guests in the palace of your mind and
leave this mental kingdom quickly.
Step 3: The New Reality: The Slide Strategy
Once you have made the decision to change and challenged the
pattern, you must then replace it with the new behaviour you wish to
cultivate. This is known as Opposition Thinking and is an ancient
Indian technique practiced by the yogis who developed enormous
30
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
mental powers. The essence of the strategy is to substitute the negative
thought for a positive, empowering one. The mind is very much like a
giant slide projector - at a given moment, it can hold only a single
thought just like at any instant, a projector will only hold one slide. If
you suffer from procrastination, each time the thought of wasting time
while you should be working comes to your mind, isolate it, challenge
the stream of thought and then substitute a clear thought of you
working hard (just like replacing one slide with another).
Picture in your mind’s eye the wonderful benefits of completing
this task successfully. Will it increase your discipline and self-image?
What positive effects will your new behaviour have this year if you
keep doing it? How about in five or ten years. Start to FeelGood about
this behaviour.
Step 4: Think Good Thoughts
Now that you have opposed the negative thought with the
empowering one, it will slowly start to crumble as it realizes it is
unwelcome in your winning mindset. Thoughts are things and it is so
very important that you recognize that you control the thoughts in
your mind - not the other way around. The key is to continually
practice the process given to you above until the new, powerful
thinking pattern is conditioned in your mind. Go over it many times.
Soon you will think only of positive behaviour and this will become a
habit. This is the first stage of your new destiny.
MEGATHINKING! & THE ENCHANTMENT OF
POSITIVITY
Believe in yourself! Have faith in your abilities! Without a humble
but reasonable confidence in your own powers you cannot be
successful or happy.
Norman Vincent Peale
Program yourself for total success and self-confidence. What you think
you will become. Your mind is the Universe’s most powerful computer
and you are the programmer. What you enter into it is all that will
come out. The quality of your life therefore is a direct result of what
31
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
you put into your mind - your programming. Your thoughts are things
which you are releasing into the world. Make certain that these
messengers are in perfect health and fine shape. If you think negative
thoughts all day, you will have little energy, no enthusiasm and may
soon become ill. It is beyond debate in this age of mind-body medicine
that thoughts are things that have a significant result on the
physiology of the body. If you think weak thoughts, you are sending out
bad signals to your body and filling it with harmful toxins that not only
impede your performance but shorten your lifespan.
MegaThinking! is a habit that you can cultivate. It is a mode of
thinking without limitations. You see the wonders of life and celebrate
your world. It is not seeing the world through rose-colored glasses and
being unrealistic. It is seeing the cup half full rather than half empty.
It is recognizing that you deserve to have everything you want in life
and attaining your goals is simply a matter of believing in yourself and
then taking tremendous action to accomplish them. A habit is like a
wire cable. It starts off with a thin thread and through constant
conditioning, it becomes stronger and stronger until a time arrives
when it cannot be broken. The MegaLiving! life mastery program
shows you how to become a MegaThinker and see the immense
possibilities that you may have been neglecting.
Olympic athletes have understood the tremendous power of the
mind and the importance of mental discipline in sports excellence. At
that level of competition, what separates the medal winners from the
“also rans” is the “winner’s mindset.” Just as they enter into a top-flight
conditioning program for their bodies, such athletes vigorously train
their minds to focus on winning and peak performance.
The Champion’s Mindset
Virtually every elite athlete has a sports psychology regimen
alongside nutritional considerations and general body training. Many
say that the key is to harness the mind’s exceptional psychic energy to
create the desired results. This can be done by visualizing success at the
event, going through rituals in preparation for the event and practising
meditative exercises designed to calm the body, ridding it of the
stresses that hamper peak performance.
32
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
In 1954, Roger Bannister did what many people thought no
human could ever do - he broke the four minute mile barrier. When
asked how he did this, he replied that he simply ran the perfect race
over and over on the movie screen of his mind before he ran it in
reality. Tennis ace Andre Agassi is a master at the art of visualization
as is golf legend Jack Nicklaus, soccer superstar Pele and Olympic gold
medalist Bruce Jenner. But mental excellence and the technique of
visualization should not be limited to the playing field. Visualization,
where one mentally rehearses the ideal performance in his mind over
and over before the actual event, should be a tool in the success arsenal
of every peak performer.
Increasingly, non-elite athletes in the arena of life are applying
the mental conditioning strategies of Olympians to live better, live
longer and achieve positive results. You must condition your mind and
enter into a mind-training routine as if you were an elite athlete
preparing for the event of your life. You must take your training
seriously and become devoted to true excellence. You have
phenomenal powers lurking deep inside of you, whether you realize
this or not. You are likely using only 25% of your mind’s vast reserves.
What about the remaining 75%? If you want a supermemory, to have
the focus of a laser beam, the creativity of a genius or the serenity of
an Indian yogi living deep in the Himalayas, you must earn it and train
your mind. This will not occur overnight but it will happen if you use
your personal power to make it happen. MegaLiving! will get you on
track for the big results that you want and deserve.
Also, it is imperative that you develop a winning attitude. The
limits you impose in your mental factory are the limits you impose on
your life. Shatter the myth, once and for all, that you are too old, too
young, too tired, too taxed, too poor or too average to do extraordinary
things. You can have whatever you want but step one means
controlling the thoughts swirling around in the garden of your mind.
If you encourage yourself daily and cultivate the garden of your mind
it will blossom far beyond your expectations. But if you let the toxic
weeds of negative thoughts and bad habits take over, you will never
achieve the quality of life which you desire and deserve.
You must expect to win at the game of life. Marcus Allen, the
33
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
first-class NFL running back said: “My whole game is attitude. You’ve
got to think positively to achieve the impossible, to be what you
expect to be. If you seek mediocrity, then that’s all you get!” As you
prepare for each day or a special event such as a big presentation, court
case or sports meet, run a mental video of the perfect result in your
mind. Smell the air, see all the details of the activity-the more precise
the better. See yourself smiling and meeting with huge success. Think
of how you want to feel and will feel. Feel the success and the pleasure
you will receive on another job well done. Creative visualization works
so put it into your self-mastery toolbox.
Become the most positive person you know. Cultivate the spirit
of positivity and joy in every area of your life. Become a true
adventurer, seeing life’s little obstacles as challenges that will allow you
to become wiser and to grow. Learn to love adversity and to thrive on
it. The great business leaders of our time from Getty to Ted Turner
loved big challenges and turned them into opportunities for
magnificent wealth. Critics called CNN the “chicken noodle
network” when it first came out. But Turner persisted. He understood
that successful people are no different from anyone else, they just stay
in the fight an extra round longer. This is the difference between
winners and less developed people. Unsuccessful people see adversity
as something that will break them and complain that life is hard.
Winners design strategies to benefit from challenges, regroup if they do
not work and maintain a burning commitment to succeed at all cost.
Winners will always find a way.
THE MAGIC OF GOALS :
YOUR VISIONS OF EXCELLENCE
Nothing can stop the man with the right mental attitude from
achieving his goal; nothing on earth can help the man with the wrong
mental attitude.
W.W. Ziege
Highly successful people, from leaders in the world of finance to
parents leading happy, loving families, all share one powerful habit:
they set goals. Clear goals are the essential foundation of success and
34
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
life mastery. Without clearly defined goals for both the near future and
the long-term, you are like a ship moving through the deep seas
without a course. You are like a jet flying without a flight plan. You are
like a brain surgeon operating with a blindfold on. Lasting self-mastery
and life excellence will only come about when you set precise
objectives for every facet of your life. Peak performers know precisely
where they are going mentally, physically, emotionally, spiritually and
financially. Because how could you possibly hit a target you cannot
even see? Once you take the time to set and regularly review your
goals, your mind will spot opportunities to allow your desires to be
fulfilled. This is when you start to live your dreams and put far more
living into your life.
One of the truest laws of Nature is that what you focus on
constantly with great emotion and expectation will become a reality.
You can use this age-old principle to destroy your life by thinking about
the negatives or to make it phenomenal by aiming for the stars and
expecting your desires to come true. As Henry Ford has said:
“Thinking always ahead, thinking always of trying to do more, brings
a state of mind in which nothing seems impossible.” You do not start
creating the life you want 20 years from now in 20 years, you start this
very day by setting precise goals, developing a clear plan and then by
taking dedicated action. Every day, you must take some action to
advance confidently in the direction of your ultimate destination.
Every thought must be a useful one that will boost your enthusiasm for
the accomplishment of your hopes. Step one on the magical road to
success is the setting of your goals.
Here is the MegaLiving! 7 Step Formula to Achieve Your Goals:
1. Know What You Want. Find, recognize & mentally visualize the
goals you are working towards. One of life’s biggest success tips is to
figure out what you love doing and then find someone who will pay
you to do it. What are your secret ambitions? Perhaps the best way to
determine your life goals is to write your own eulogy. Picture your own
funeral and what you would like said about you and your
accomplishments. Do you want to hear that you were the richest
person in your country, the best piano player in your city or the
happiest person that anyone had ever met? Think deeply about where
35
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
you want to be in 5, 10 and 20 years. These are your life goals.
2. Set Precise Goals with a Deadline & Develop a Strategy. Once
you know the direction in which you are travelling through life, your
days take on new meaning. You start to live with tremendous passion
and focus. Write out your goals and attach firm deadlines to them so
you will not put them off. Then develop a daily plan of attack which
breaks the big goal into smaller bite-sized chunks that are are easy to
swallow and far less intimidating. If a goal is too overwhelming
(running a marathon next month for someone who cannot walk a
block with ease), it will not even be tackled. But if it is broken down
into smaller bits (start walking a block a day, then jog a mile for the
next 5 weeks and after a few months, crank up the mileage) it becomes
manageable and even fun.
Rick Hansen, the man who travelled around the world in his
wheelchair was asked the secret of achieving this exceptional feat. He
said that rather than focusing on the 24,901 miles he had to cover, he
simply thought only about taking one session at a time, 23 miles per
session, three sessions a day. Start off small. Small victories always lead
to large ones.
3. Let Your Goals Dominate Your Thoughts. When one of the
world’s greatest scientists, Sir Isaac Newton, was asked the key to his
awesome success he replied that he thought of nothing else. Study any
winner in life and you will see that they have trained their mind to
concentrate on nothing but the attainment of their goals. By thinking
constantly of the realization of their dreams, they developed a truly
unshakable belief and faith that every single one of their desires would
come true. Winners expect success. Remember that ageless principle:
your inner world determines your outer world. Therefore, every
morning, recite your goals out loud. Take at least 10 minutes every
evening and visualize yourself doing what you want to do. Picture the
fun and happiness you will feel when, at the end of your life, you have
done all that you wanted to do.
4. Use Pressure to Your Benefit. Pressure is not always a bad thing.
One of the primary reasons that most goals are not reached is that it is
too easy to let them slip to the side of the road because other more
pressing things happen to come up. But if there is a little pressure on
36
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
you to reach your goal, whether it is to lose weight, make a lot more
money or make a lot more out of life, you will be pushed forward and
work harder to make it happen. You can get pressure behind you by
making a public declaration and telling everyone you know that you
will lose the extra weight or stop the nagging habit, or whatever it is
you want to achieve.
5. Enlist Support. Tell your friends and family what you are doing.
Get as much support behind you as possible. If you want to run a
marathon, join a running club. If you want to learn how to be a great
orator, join Toastmasters. If you want to attain financial mastery, start
a mastermind group that meets weekly to discuss which strategies work
and which ones do not. Having a support network will keep you
focused, motivated and inspired.
6. Remember the Rule of 21. If you do anything for 21 days in a row,
you will have an excellent chance of making it into a habit. There is
power in persistence. Whether you are trying to erase the worry habit,
develop the discipline of a daily walk in a natural setting or trying to
quit smoking, persevere for 21 days. Samuel Johnson wrote that “great
acts are performed not through strength but by perseverance.”
7. Have Fun & Reward Yourself. “Enjoy the journey” say the sages
of the East. Treat yourself when you achieve even the smallest of your
goals. Small victories bring large victories. And do not be too hard on
yourself if you don’t achieve a goal on schedule. Be flexible. Try
another approach but never, ever give up if your aim is worthy.
If it is peace of mind that you are ultimately searching for, you
will have to find time to meditate and master your spiritual dimension.
If it is perfect health, you will have to find time to develop your body,
refine your diet and exercise. Whatever you are aiming towards, you
must commit yourself to making small sacrifices for the larger good of
your life goals. But once you set yourself firmly on the wonderful path
of your goals, your life will change very dramatically. You will wake up
with a fire in your belly and a passion for the day. You will feel
productive, confident and deeply happy. You will feel fulfilled as if your
life has true meaning. Remember, the purpose of life is a life of purpose.
You become a creator in full control of your destiny rather than a
person who simply floats through life responding to whatever events
37
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
fall into your path. With goals, you start to tap your human potential
and realize the perfect life that has always been deep within you.
The Success Mechanism
In the early 1960’s researchers learned that every person has a
Success Mechanism built into their mind. This device works with your
creative imagination and is goal striving. In other words, the Success
Mechanism is triggered by positive goals that you give to it. Once you
feed the mechanism a goal, it takes over and relies on all of your past
experience to scan for any feedback and information which will allow
it to accomplish the goal given. Ideas and inspirations that you may
have been exposed to in the past almost unconsciously, are still deep
inside of your mind, waiting to be recalled to assist you in your
achievement. By setting clearly defined goals with time limits, your
Success Mechanism leaps into action.
Hunches and intuition reflect nothing more than this tool at
work. Most importantly, the mechanism is guided by the mental
images of your past experiences. For example, if you were asked to give
a big speech at the last convention you attended and fumbled badly, a
mental picture of that event has been indelibly etched in your mind.
You may have played and replayed the mental movie of the negative
speech over and over until it became embedded in it. Now, when you
have to give another speech, the mechanism scans for relevant
information and comes up with this negative picture which often has
the result of leading to another unsuccessful performance.
However, the Success Mechanism can be fooled. It cannot tell
the difference between a mental picture that has actually happened
(i.e., your bad speech) and one that you put into the mind by dreaming
and visualizing. Therefore by visualizing yourself over and over, giving
the perfect speech to thunderous applause and cheers, the mechanism
picks up this “past experience” and powerfully ensures that it becomes
a reality. Using this little-known knowledge you can re-program your
mind, which is really nothing more than the world’s most powerful
computer, by picturing in your mind’s eye the achievement of each and
every one of your goals. Be very graphic. If you desire a house in the
Caribbean, see the style, color, location and dimensions. Feel how it
would be to live in that house. Now determine what you must do to
38
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
get the house. See the desired results happening and truly believe that
they will be achieved. Practice this technique every day, whenever you
have a quiet moment. This tool works and will bring you all that you
desire. Can you really afford not to try it for at least 30 Days?
Earlier, it was strongly suggested that you “mirror image”
someone who has met with an abundance of success in the field of your
interest. When you do this, as well as when you study any great leader,
business person or “wonder” person, you will see that their mastery and
results have arrived, in part, through the setting of clearly defined goals.
Goals will serve to motivate, inspire and guide you as you reach for
what you want out of life. Goals serve as your personal lighthouse.
Without them, you are gambling with your future. Do you really want
to play the game of life as if it were a roulette wheel? Get certainty into
your life; set your goals!
Your Goal-Setting Workshop!
Before moving on, please spend some time assessing your goals
and aspirations. It is not only tremendously important to the success of
the 30 day MegaLiving! program but it is a fun exercise.
Step 1: Your Masterplan for Life Mastery
On a piece of paper, write out your mission statement in life.
Make it succinct. Your mission statement is a capsule statement of
what you want to accomplish in your life and how you wish to be
remembered. It is a combination of the values you wish to live by and
the major goals you are determined to achieve. Keep it general but
focused on the true keys of your life. Your mission statement is your
lighthouse. It will guide you through good times and bad. It will keep
you focused and advancing confidently along the path of your dreams.
For example, your mission might read as follows:
My mission is to become a person of true character and integrity,
contributing to my country and attaining a state of peak health and mental
serenity. I will have a superb family and professional life while I build lasting
wealth. I will be courteous to all and live my life with tremendous zest and
joy.
This is your guiding light, a clear statement of where you are
going in life. This masterplan will keep you on course when others try
39
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
to push you off it or when life’s wonderful obstacles visit you. Put your
mission where you can see it regularly such as beside your bathroom
mirror and read it slowly at least twice a day.
Step 2: Your Personal Mastery Goals
Now that you know where you want to be at the end of your life
in general terms, turn to specifics. Set the one year, five year and ten
year goals for your personal development. Think of how fit you want
to be, what personal qualities you wish to develop, what strategies you
want to master, how you hope to feel, look and think, what kind of
intellect and memory you want, what books, tapes and seminars do you
desire to attend (the list goes on). Write them out as there is a
dramatic impact on your subconscious mind when things are set on
paper. Very importantly, note time limits for yourself to achieve these
results.
Top 10 Personal Mastery Goals for This Year & Their Time Limit
1. _______________________________________
2. _______________________________________
3. _______________________________________
4. _______________________________________
5. _______________________________________
6. _______________________________________
7. _______________________________________
8. _______________________________________
9. _______________________________________
10. _______________________________________
Throughout this book, it has been emphasized that there is no
pursuit more noble that mastering yourself. Each day, it is crucial that
you set aside some time to tend to yourself, to care for your mind, to
relax your intellect and to nurture your body and soul. Like everything
else in life, the key is to make the practice a habit if you truly want to
be effective.
Now think about your life in five years. How to you want to feel?
What do you want to know and what qualities do you desire to have.
How about more passion for life, more joy, a better temperament, a
40
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
greater degree of serenity and inner calmness, more enthusiasm and
more creativity?
All these qualities can be yours if you start striving towards them
today. Remember that you cannot start to design your future far off
into the future. Jump start your life now with a wonderful set of
challenges for yourself. All satisfaction in life comes from rising to the
challenges you set for yourself and overcoming them with enthusiasm
and vigor. Do not put off this exercise for even a day. It will change
your life and set you on the path of personal mastery that you have
always longed to walk.
Now list your top ten five year personal mastery goals:
Top Ten Personal Mastery Goals for Five Years
1. _______________________________________
2. _______________________________________
3. _______________________________________
4. _______________________________________
5. _______________________________________
6. _______________________________________
7. _______________________________________
8. _______________________________________
9. _______________________________________
10. ______________________________________
Top Ten Personal Mastery Goals for Ten Years
1. _______________________________________
2. _______________________________________
3. _______________________________________
4. _______________________________________
5. _______________________________________
6. _______________________________________
7. _______________________________________
8. _______________________________________
9. _______________________________________
10. _______________________________________
41
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
Step 3: Your Material & Fun Goals
At this stage of your goal setting workshop, you will think about
and note down your material and fun goals. The only limits to what
you can receive are those you choose to set up in your imagination. Let
it run wild. There are many things that still remain mystical in this
world and one of them is the principle of why, when goals are written
down and kept at the center of you mind they come true, provided you
take action to have the desired result.
Do not analyze how Nature works. Simply think big and have
some fun here. Note all the material things you want (be creative and
precise). It is also essential that you write quickly so that your true
desires come out and so that you do not start to think your goals are
too large to come true. Paupers have become millionaires in 12
months. No dream is ever too big. Do you want a house in Bermuda?
How about scuba diving in the Cayman Islands or mountain climbing
in Nepal. Do you want a BMW, a sailboat or a trip around the world?
Perhaps you simply want to live with more spirit, richness and vitality.
Write all these things down, quickly and with the time limits for their
attainment. Start now!
Top Ten Material & Fun Goals for This Year
1. _______________________________________
2. _______________________________________
3. _______________________________________
4. _______________________________________
5. _______________________________________
6. _______________________________________
7. _______________________________________
8. _______________________________________
9. _______________________________________
10. _______________________________________
42
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
Top Ten Material & Fun Goals for Five Years
1. _______________________________________
2. _______________________________________
3. _______________________________________
4. _______________________________________
5. _______________________________________
6. _______________________________________
7. _______________________________________
8. _______________________________________
9. _______________________________________
10. _______________________________________
Top Ten Material & Fun Goals for Ten Years
1. _______________________________________
2. _______________________________________
3. _______________________________________
4. _______________________________________
5. _______________________________________
6. _______________________________________
7. _______________________________________
8. _______________________________________
9. _______________________________________
10. _______________________________________
Step 4: Your Financial Future
Meticulously consider where you want to be from a financial
viewpoint over the next number of years. How much money do you
want to make and by when? What amount would truly make you
happy and allow you the freedom to do all the things you want to do?
What investments do you want to own? Your financial destiny will
affect your personal destiny so think about it very carefully.
43
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
Top Ten Financial Goals for This Year
1. _______________________________________
2. _______________________________________
3. _______________________________________
4. _______________________________________
5. _______________________________________
6. _______________________________________
7. _______________________________________
8. _______________________________________
9. _______________________________________
10. _______________________________________
Top Ten Financial Goals For Five Years
1. _______________________________________
2. _______________________________________
3. _______________________________________
4. _______________________________________
5. _______________________________________
6. _______________________________________
7. _______________________________________
8. _______________________________________
9. _______________________________________
10. _______________________________________
Top Ten Financial Goals For Ten Years
1. _______________________________________
2. _______________________________________
3. _______________________________________
4. _______________________________________
5. _______________________________________
6. _______________________________________
7. _______________________________________
8. _______________________________________
9. _______________________________________
10. _______________________________________
44
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life 45
Goals are the lifeblood of lasting achievement and personal
excellence. By physically writing out your goals on a piece of paper,
you have set very special forces into play which will work to bring
them into reality. Earlier you learned that most people think about
60,000 thoughts a day. By writing out your goals, you have set up a red
flag for your mind, telling it that these thoughts and ideas are far more
important than the remaining 59,999 swirling around your mental
factory. So many people who have come to my seminars, including
CEO’s of leading corporations, elite athletes, students, salespeople and
parents, have told me that their lives changed in a very profound way
once they had thought deeply about their mission and their goals and
committed them to paper.
You have now set the goals that will provide you with
inspiration and a burning desire. You now have the clearest picture you
have ever had of your path of life and your true wants. Most people
pass through life without any idea as to where they are going. You have
now overcome this hurdle. The next key is to maintain a consistent
focus on your goals. Never let these dreams die no matter how far off
they might seem today. Nature works in fabulously wonderful ways.
Once a goal is set and the mind concentrated on its achievement,
Nature exerts its powerful influence to bring about its realization.
Believe in your dreams, reach for the stars and have the destiny that
you know is yours! Remember what Thoreau promised: “If one
advances confidently in the direction of his dreams and endeavours to
live the life which he has imagined, he will meet with a success
unexpected in common hours.”
The Secret Success Formula: 5 Steps to Turn Your Dreams Into
Reality
You have now completed your goal-setting workshop. To assist
you in achieving your goals quickly, a very special success formula is
offered to you. This technique might seem strange but it is likely one
of the most effective you will ever find. Many peak performers in
business, sports, the arts and in science have used it with an enormous
degree of success. The formula operates on the basis of autosuggestion
and will work wonders for you if you believe in it and apply it diligently
for a period of months. Even before this period is over, you will notice
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
striking changes in your life for the better. Einstein, Emerson,
Napoleon Hill, Olympic athletes and many other high achievers have
used this strategy in one form or another for one reason - it works!
1. Clearly decide on your goal and picture its attainment in your
mind every night just before you sleep. Picture yourself having
achieved your outcome. Make your visualization clear and
colorful.
2. Develop a strong belief that it will come true by autosuggestion
(repetition of the idea aloud) throughout the day. Self-suggestion
has been used very successfully in the East for over 4000 years
and is an age-old method of developing strong faith. Repeat your
desire aloud ten times before you sleep.
3. Through repetition of thought, the goal will become a burning
desire.
4. Develop a clear plan of how you will achieve the goal and seek
out all opportunities for its fruition.
5. Write out the goal, the plan of action and the date by which you
will achieve it. Repeat this aloud 10 times a day with belief in its
purpose and with intense feeling.
As mentioned, this success formula may seem odd but it has been
used by some of the world’s most successful leaders and it will surely
work for you. Do not apply it for only a day and then give up. This is
a special gift that you are receiving. Have faith in this formula and it
will work wonders for you. All your dreams will be placed at the
forefront of your consciousness and the forces of thought will make
them come true.
Now that you know where you are going and you firmly believe
that you will have all that you desire, you must regularly set aside time
every day to review your goals and consider how you will feel once you
reach them. By applying this strategy, you will constantly be
motivating both your conscious and subconscious mind to fulfill your
dreams.
46
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
As you move to higher levels in your life through the application
of the powerful principles in the MegaLiving! program, remember
these words of Woodrow Wilson:
We grow great by dreams. All big men are dreamers. They see
things in the soft haze of a spring day or in the red fire of a long
winter’s evening. Some of us let great dreams die, but others
nourish and protect them, nurse them through bad days till
they bring them to the sunshine and light which comes always
to those who sincerely hope that their dreams will come true.
47
48 MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
THE POWER OF EXERCISE :
YOUR FOUNTAIN OF YOUTH
You can transform your life and lift it to a much higher level by one
simple activity: exercise. People are willing to go under the knife to
look years younger, try bizarre diets and coat their bodies with New
Age longevity creams when everyone knows that the surefire way to
look young and feel fantastic is to spend some time everyday in some
form of physical activity.
Before his championship matches, chess superstar Bobby Fisher
did not spend his days solely studying the chess strategies of his
opponents nor practising this wonderfully intellectual game. He
focused most of his training on becoming physically fit by running long
distances and doing laps in the swimming pool to increase his physical
stamina and mental endurance. This was his ultimate weapon to
unlock his extraordinary potential and it should be yours.
Top executives, world leaders and other peak performers all have
one thing in common: they have understood the tremendous power of
vigorous exercise on a daily basis as a tool for self-mastery and life
excellence. Do not say that you are so busy you cannot afford to
49
If I have the belief that I can do it, I shall surely acquire the capacity
to do it, even if I do not have it at the beginning.
Mahatma Ghandi
CHAPTER THREE
Your Body: Achieving Physical Mastery
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
exercise. If you are truly busy, then you cannot afford not to exercise.
Make one of the best decisions of your life and make the commitment
to an exercise routine today. If you already are involved in a fitness
program, take it to the next level or start competing in the sport of
your interest. Remember the spirit of Kaizen: if you are not moving
forward, you are moving backward.
Here are just a few of the benefits you will receive from daily
physical exercise:
a) A significant increase in your energy levels and stamina
b) A higher state of general health and an ideal weight
c) Better muscle tone and a trimmer physique
d) A much more relaxed and serene mental outlook
e) More enthusiasm and confidence
f) Greater alertness and mental poise
g) Less illness and enhanced achievement/productivity
h) More discipline in all areas of life
i) Increased circulation and oxygenation
j) Much greater resistance to stress
Physical mastery will rocket you to a vital life quicker than
almost any other strategy. It is not expensive to achieve and can be
exceptionally fun if you approach it with the right attitude. Once you
are on a fitness program, you will become so used to it that it becomes
a daily habit like brushing your teeth and showering. You do not think
twice about these activities each day and the same approach must be
taken to your exercise regimen. When you do, all aspects of your life
will improve including your mental agility, social relationships and
peace of mind. Take a minute and list five negative effects of not
exercising that you truly want to avoid:
1. _______________________________________
2. _______________________________________
3. _______________________________________
4. _______________________________________
5. _______________________________________
50
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life 51
Now consider ten benefits you will receive from exercise. List the
changes and impact it can have on your life both this year, in five years
and in twenty. Really feel what you will miss, what fun you will not enjoy
if you do not wake up each day to the wonders of physical mastery.
10 benefits that I will receive from exercise
1. _______________________________________
2. _______________________________________
3. _______________________________________
4. _______________________________________
5. _______________________________________
6. _______________________________________
7. _______________________________________
8. _______________________________________
9. _______________________________________
10. _______________________________________
You have now clarified in your mind the pain that you will suffer
over the remaining years of your life without exercise and the big
benefits you are bound to receive if you make physical excellence a
burning goal (The FeelGood Principle). The MegaLiving! 30 day
program will provide you with the tools to unlock the perfect state of
health that you are capable of achieving. But the first step is to make
a commitment to physical mastery and a daily dose of exercise. As the
old saying goes: “the person who has no time for exercise must make
time for illness.”
Here are just a few of the activities that will revitalize and juiceup
your life:
* Running, walking or hiking in the mountains
* Swimming, playing tennis, weights or aerobics
* Having a brisk walk in natural surroundings
* Martial arts, yoga, deep breathing exercises
* Skating with your kids, rollerblading to work
* Gardening, running a marathon and cross-training
* Sailing, scuba diving or waterskiing
* Doing a mini-triathlon or jogging on the beach
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
If you are just getting into an exercise regimen, one of the best
all-round pastimes for both body and mind conditioning is yoga. Yoga
is the Sanscrit word meaning union of mind and body. This 5000 yearold
activity will boost your stamina, provide you with exceptional
relaxation and increase your concentration dramatically. Yoga, when
combined with a healthful diet and positive thinking will have truly
dramatic effects on your life and the passion that you bring to it. Try it
a few times and you will never give it up. You will stay younger longer,
be far more productive, erase the worry habit and radiate an
exceptional degree of vitality. The practice of yoga offers not only
physical but mental training as well and is the world’s oldest system of
personal development.
Once you decide to accept the challenge of physical mastery, you
must remain disciplined, consistent and motivated in your workouts to
see real, lasting results. After 30 days, things will start to spark in all
areas of your life and you will undoubtedly feel better than you have
ever felt. One of the best things about daily exercise, whether it is a
quick walk around the block or a stretching routine in a nearby park
on a sunny day, is the marked increase you will detect in your energy
levels. You will no longer feel like hitting the couch when you come
home from work after a long day. Instead you will be eager to do fun,
productive things that are sure to enhance the quality of your life. In
fact, you will feel unstoppable. Here’s how to stay motivated:
1. Start off easy (15 min/day) and think strong
2. Have fun and maintain a positive, playful attitude
3. Get a partner with a similar goal of physical mastery
4. Cross-train with different sports to keep the regimen fresh
5. Write down your 1, 5 and 10 year fitness goals
6. Use positive motivators like pictures of what you will achieve
7. Use visualization techniques to focus on what you will be
8. Make the program a habit. Do it at the same time daily
9. Affirm each minor success - the 1000 mile journey begins with
one step
10. Use the momentum of daily minor successes from your program to
catapult you to greater challenges: aim high!
52
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
Physical exercise will change you. It will add power and focus to
your dreams. It is so simple. Out of the 168 hours in your week, can
you not spare 6 or 7 in the interest of your longevity, mental toughness
and happiness? As stated by Humboldt: “True enjoyment comes from
activity of the mind and exercise of the body; the two are ever united.”
THE MAGIC OF DIET :
EATING YOUR WAY TO EXCELLENCE
You are what you eat. By transforming your diet, you can dramatically
reshape your body, moods, energy levels and overall vitality. All the
mind-conditioning strategies and self-mastery techniques discussed
above will not help you if you do not have the energy and health to
apply and excel with them. This section is about the fuels you put into
your body, your physical miracle. By caring for it with proper and
thoughtful nutrition, you will have the longevity and ability to achieve
your dreams. By letting it breakdown, your dreams will crumble and
remain unfulfilled.
In ancient India, it was believed that mental clarity and mental
toughness were directly related to the nature of one’s diet. Light, nonmeat
foods such as vegetables and fruits were favoured by the yogis
who felt that the flow of personal power and energy (called prana) was
hampered by meat. Recent scientific studies now confirm that the
mind and body are powerfully linked and if one is not operating at its
optimal levels, the functioning of the other suffers. Treat both well and
you create the magnificent life you deserve.
Eating Live Foods: A Giant Step to Physical Mastery!
The ancient yogis of the Himalayas are an excellent study on
longevity, physical strength and mental toughness. Many live beyond
the age of 100 and maintain lithe, limber and strong bodies
throughout their lives, being able to perform tremendous feats well
into what North Americans consider their last years. These masters
can go for weeks without sleep and food and can endure exceptionally
high levels of pain. What is the secret of their long, youthful lives? It
is simply that they, along with almost every other group known for
exceptional longevity and good health, eat in moderation and follow
a strictly natural diet.
53
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
The “sattvic” or pure diet is one based on living foods - those
created by the natural interaction of the sun, air, soil and water. The
“sattvic” diet emphasizes fruits (and their fresh juices), vegetables and
grains. By making changes to your diet to ensure that these Megafoods
form at least 70% of your diet, you will take the first step to ensuring
physical mastery and a vital life. Try it for 30 days and you will surely
be astonished by the phenomenal results. Here are some of the proven
benefits you will receive when you start to eat living foods regularly
rather than dead foods (meat products):
1. A significant increase in your energy & stamina
2. Enhanced concentration & creativity
3. Decreased obesity, loss of body fat
4. Enhanced complexion, skin tone and vitality
5. Lower sleep requirements
6. Less digestive difficulties
7. Improved alertness and mental agility, memory benefits
8. A longer life with fewer diseases
9. A greater sense of harmony with Nature
10. General health excellence
A diet rich in vegetables, grains and fruits is truly what nature
intended for us to have. For example, our teeth and intestines are
strikingly different from carnivores such as dogs and are more
anatomically similar to fruit-eating primates. Meats such as beef and
poultry provide second-hand nutrition - that gained from the animal
eating natural fruits and vegetables. As well, animal flesh has been
found to have a high proportion of toxins and lacks many of the
important vitamins and minerals that we need to function at optimal
levels. Importantly, meat is particularly hard to digest and greatly
depletes our energy reserves in the digestive process. Compare how you
feel after eating a steak for a meal, with the way you feel after eating a
fresh salad. Natural foods such as fruits are easily digested, leaving the
energy available for more productive pursuits like achieving your
dreams and becoming the very best that you can be.
If meat is so bad for us, why do we eat it? Most proponents argue
that vegetarian diets do not provide proper protein. But it is ironic that
those who eat meat get the worst quality protein available. Meat
54
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
protein contains too much uric acid to be broken down by the liver
and can lead to serious health problems in later life. Vegetables and
dairy products all provide an excellent source of protein and in a much
higher quality than that found in meat products. One need only look
at the most powerful animals on the planet. The elephant, rhino and
gorilla (which has thirty times a man’s strength) all survive on
vegetables or fruits. Fruits and vegetables will provide you with all the
building blocks for first-class protein.
Unlocking Your Energy Reserves: Exposing Your True Vitality
Energy is the first fundamental of life excellence for without an
abundance of it you are like a rocket without fuel. For peak energy, it
is important that you eat according to the natural cycles which occur
in your body. They are as follows:
1. The Welcoming Cycle noon - 8 p.m. (Megafoods such as fruits
taken in and digested)
2. The Absorption Cycle 8 p.m. - 4 a.m. (the foods are used)
3. The Removal Cycle 4 a.m. - noon (foods are eliminated)
By recognizing these natural body cycles and eating in a way to
allow each cycle to be most effective, you will release your tremendous
energy reserves and see more vibrant health than ever before. The key
is to ensure that toxins are flushed out of the body and the body
remains pure inside. This is done by considering the following:
1. Eat high water content foods
The planet is 70% water as is your body. To properly cleanse your
system and to ensure that it is in a peak performance state, you must
make certain that your diet consists of at least 70% high water content
foods (vegetables and fruits). The 3 body cycles function best when
supplied with water from these sources on a regular basis (the 8 glasses
of water a day theory floods the body unnecessarily).
2. Work with the 3 Cycles
Once you are eating water-rich, live foods, you must ensure that
your intake corresponds with the cycles. In the morning (until noon)
when the body is trying to eliminate toxins and other wastes, eat only
fruit. This will make the cleansing/elimination process far more
55
56 MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
efficient. After noon, have your meals (70% of your diet should be
vegetables, grains and fruits). After 8 p.m., eat nothing. Otherwise you
will hamper the absorption process and clog the system (again draining
your energy reserves and working the digestive process overtime). By
following this suggestion you will also sleep far more restfully.
Making the nutritional changes above are not as difficult as they
might seem. To ensure a high water content, simply have a salad with
all your meals. In the morning (when you are eliminating wastes and
should therefore only have fruit), start off the day powerfully with a
glass of fresh orange or apple juice. One of the very best investments
you can make is buying an inexpensive juicer. There are many
excellent juicing books now on the market as this practice has become
one of the hot trends across the country. Combinations such as applestrawberry
and raspberry-watermelon should change the minds of even
the most ardent non-believers.
For lunch, rather than a hot dog and fries, why not have a salad
consisting of greens, peppers, artichokes, celery, carrots, green onion,
marinated veggies and cherry tomatoes. You only need to visit one of
the many wonderful salad bars in any office building to see that they
are fabulously tasty and far different from the old, boring salads you
may have had as a kid. For dinner, add meat if you must but make sure
the meal is full of vegetables and grains to ensure optimal health and
energy. Live this lifestyle for just one month and the transformation
will blow your mind. This is not some trendy diet craze. This is for real.
By eating natural, water-rich foods - MegaFoods - you will be able to
do those things that you were always too tired to do.
If you are truly sick and tired of being sick and tired, try the
suggestions mentioned above. Another idea to consider is the
discipline of fasting which has been prevalent among Eastern cultures
for many centuries. Fasting not only offers you health benefits, it is an
ageless technique used to build will-power. And it is easy to do. Simply
eat only vegetables and drink fresh fruit juices for a day every few
weeks and you will be fasting in a safe, enjoyable way for good health.
In any event, explore the many advantages of a largely
vegetarian diet. In a recent study in Finland, researchers learned that
38% of the new vegetarians studied reported that they felt less fatigued
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
and more alert after only seven months. You do not have to take things
to an extreme and give up meat entirely if this doesn’t suit your
lifestyle. Just cut back on your intake of meat products and develop a
love of good fruits and vegetables. Start eating more ethnic foods
which offer tasty, meatless dishes (Italian, Chinese, Indian, Japanese
and Thai are all excellent choices). In our society, a great plague is our
lack of energy. So many people are living in a permanent state of
autopilot and are perpetually exhausted. By adjusting your diet to
include more high water content foods, your energy levels and mental
agility will improve profoundly. You will finally be able to have the fun
you always wanted to have and, ultimately, live the life you have
always wanted to live!
5 ANCIENT SECRETS OF THE EAST FOR LONGEVITY
Longevity Secret 1: Breathing Your Way to Perfect Health
When the breath wanders, the mind is unsteady, but when the breath
is still, so is the mind still.
Ancient yoga principle
Take food or water out of your life and you can live for days. Take away
breath and you will die a quick death. Breathing is essential to living.
Learn to breathe properly and you will not only develop the skill of
changing your state of mind, you will dramatically enhance your
energy levels. Good breathing practice fully oxygenates the body and
charges up every one of your cells to fuel your activities and keep you
in a state of high vitality. Good breathing practices (as well as good
posture) will unleash the vitality that now lies inside you waiting to be
released. The techniques below are derived from age-old yogic
practices and are now being recognized throughout the world as
strategies for creating optimal health and happiness. Learn them,
practise them and share them with others.
“To breathe properly is to live properly”, said one ancient
philosopher. Deep breathing maintains a superb state of both mind
and body fitness. It is now common to use deep breathing techniques
to calm the mind when it is agitated or unfocused. Elite athletes do
deep breathing exercises to fully relax and achieve peak performance
57
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
at an important event. Actors and professional singers/speakers can be
seen in the wings before a key performance tuning up their tools with
deep breathing.
Proper breathing strategy is one of the most important elements
of physical mastery and yet it is so overlooked. Look back through the
ages at activities such as yoga and the martial arts (which were created
not only to build character but to maintain ideal health and longevity)
and you will see that deep and proper breathing practices form the
bedrock of these pursuits. If you want to live longer, be happier and
think stronger, learn to breathe properly and practise the following
exercises regularly.
Breathing Exercises for Perfect Health
1. Breathe & Hold: MegaBreathing!
This technique, which will dramatically increase your energy
after only a couple of weeks of steady use, is simple to practice and can
be done anywhere. It is also one of the best exercises to improve your
concentration if you are weak in this key area.
The essence of the exercise is to inhale to a count of two, hold
your breath for a count of eight and exhale fully to the count of four.
To aid you in your counting, you may use walking steps: walk for two
steps while inhaling fresh air deep into your lungs, hold for eight steps
and exhale strongly for four more footsteps. You will soon notice the
difference in your energy level and overall health levels.
2. Alternate Nostril Breathing
This is a thousand year old technique used to boost the energy
levels and to produce a wide array of lasting benefits to the mind, body
and spirit. After practising it, you will feel a mild feeling of euphoria.
Sit in a quiet area with your feet crossed and back straight. At all
times, your mouth should remain closed. Place your right thumb over
your right nostril and inhale to the count of two through your left
nostril. Close your eyes when you do this and imagine a giant balloon
expanding in your tummy when you take the inhalation. Now hold for
the standard eight count and, at the same time, cover your left nostril
with your right pinky. Next, exhale to the count of four through your
58
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life 59
right nostril. Next, your inhalation will be through the right nostril,
hold and exhale through the left (your thumb is now on the right
nostril). Practice this alternate nostril breathing for five minutes every
morning and the benefits will come fast.
3. The Pump
This is a quick energy booster which you may use before a big
presentation or meeting. Simply sit down and place your hands over
your belly as if you were cupping a balloon. Now pump/push in your
stomach at the belly button area and exhale strongly through your
nose at the same time. Then, inhale through your nose and push the
belly outward. Repeat the process twenty times, speeding up as you
grow more comfortable.
4. The Early Riser
There is nothing quite as good for your mind, body and spirit as
a beautiful walk through the woods or along the sea in the early
morning. Try it once a week, perhaps on Sunday mornings. It will calm
your mind and allow you to maintain a balanced perspective on what
this special life is really about and the wonders that are out there for
the taking. Every day is a celebration. Every sunrise is a jewel to be
savoured. Be sure to breathe deeply while you are walking (inhale two
counts, hold eight and exhale four).
5. Green Fog Breathing
This is a technique developed by the world-class martial artists of
the Orient to place themselves into a state of serenity and elevated
calmness before competition.
The first principle of good breathing practice is to breathe with
all of your lungs and not just from the top portion of them. Proper
breathing occurs when you are using the top and bottom of the lungs,
as you do naturally when you sleep.
Now lay down on your back in a place of quiet and shut your
eyes. Repeat aloud the following phrase slowly, “I am serene, strong
and focused.” Then, while you inhale, visualize the air as deep green
fog entering your body through your nostrils, moving slowly into the
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
depths of your abdomen. The green fog then moves through the limbs
and throughout the body. Next, when the calming green fog has
travelled through the body relaxing every muscle, exhale it along with
any tensions that may have accumulated.
Keep doing this deep breathing exercise for 5 to 20 minutes daily
(preferably first thing in the morning or before any stressful situations)
for immediate calmness and internal peace. Deep breathing can
change the state of your mind and the state of your life.
The above breathing exercises reflect the very best breathing
conditioners for the mind, body and spirit. You can take your general
health to a far higher level simply by applying the above techniques on
a daily basis for thirty days. You need to spend only 10 or 15 minutes a
day on the strategies but you will surely reap huge gains and carry out
all important tasks with improved vigor and enthusiasm. With the
greater energy reserve deep breathing generates, you can do more,
achieve more and transform your world from the commonplace to the
ideal.
Longevity Secret 2: The Importance of Proper Chewing
It has been explained earlier that the process of digestion is
extremely energy consuming and the easier the process is made, the
more energy you will have for other pursuits. Proper and slow chewing
of all food might sound like an immaterial activity but it is essential for
perfect health and youthful vigor.
Most people are in such a hurry, they gobble down food half
chewed. Food should be digested in the mouth before being digested
in the stomach. Otherwise the food sits in the stomach for long periods
when, had it been chewed properly, it would have moved along nicely
and been absorbed by the body. Since the digestive process is one of
the body’s most energy consuming processes, improperly chewed food
has the effect of taking up vital energy which could be used for more
important pursuits.
Properly chewed food is digested much easier which also means
that your body requires less of it. So with proper chewing, you can cut
down on your intake and still be far healthier than you ever were.
People in our society eat far more than they require anyway and it is a
60
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
sound principle of longevity to eat better food in lesser quantities
rather than more food, poor in quality. Benjamin Franklin said, “To
lengthen thy life, lessen thy meals.”
Longevity Secret 3: Stop Acting Old
Jean Jacques Rousseau wrote, “a feeble body enfeebles the mind.”
To achieve excellent health and slow aging you must not let an old
person move into your body. Guard against acting old and the habits
of old people. Maintaining a youthful lifestyle will keep you young.
You truly are only as old as you think you are. The real secret of
longevity is to grow younger by living with passion, zest and
enthusiasm.
Studies show that thinking that as you grow older your mental
and physical faculties will diminish is a self-fulfilling prophecy. Most
surely, those who are young at heart and those who maintain a
dynamic, challenging lifestyle are actively taking steps to beat the
aging process. It is especially important to keep flexing your mind as
you age to prevent deterioration. Mental aerobics to use for enhanced
mental clarity appear in the 30 Day Program for Life Mastery at the
end of MegaLiving! But daily workouts with crosswords, learning new
languages, taking classes and best of all, reading good books, are all
highly effective ways to stay mentally sharp as you age. To keep your
mind young, simply remember that your mind will give you what you
ask of it.
Also, do not let your posture go to ruin. A poor posture has a very
negative impact on both your physical and mental health. From a
physical perspective, slouching puts undue pressure on your lower back
and has even been shown to negatively affect circulation and
breathing. From a mental viewpoint, poor posture makes you feel more
tired and less enthusiastic. The way you stand, move and act affects the
way you feel (just try feeling tired and gloomy when your are standing
tall and laughing). As William James said: “we don’t laugh because we
are happy, we are happy because we laugh.”
So keep your back straight and your head held high. Walk with
purposeful steps in a smooth strong cadence. Breathe deeply and fully
when you walk. An excellent posture is something you must always be
61
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
aware of and is a habit to be formed. The health benefits of good
posture and the excellent breathing it allows are very dramatic.
Another useful tip is to see yourself as a person in peak health.
Two or three times a day, shut your eyes and picture clearly the person
you want to become physically. See the brilliant glow in your face and
eyes and notice the smooth tone of your skin and muscles. See yourself
laughing and feel the energy that you have cultivated. By now you are
an expert at making mental pictures and must realize the incredible
power this technique offers. Make such pictures for only a month and
you will notice a huge difference. Your self-image will have improved,
you will feel better and you will have more enthusiasm for carrying out
the routines that will put you on the road to physical mastery.
Anything that you want to be, you can be if you hold a clear
picture of the desired goal in your mind with deep conviction and
emotion that it will become a reality. Add to the mix a definite time
frame for the achievement of the goal, a clear plan and daily steps in
the direction of your dream and you truly become unstoppable! Do not
give up. You are a person of great character and courage, only the weak
fail and never climb the mountain of life mastery and Perfect Health.
And not only is this journey to the higher reaches of your life a
spectacular adventure but the ultimate destination is clearly within
your grasp.
Longevity Secret 4: The Outstanding Benefits of Yoga
One of the easiest strategies for powerful physical and mental
transformation is yoga. Designed thousands of years ago by the wise
sages of India as a total means of achieving and maintaining perfect
health of the mind, body and spirit, it will do wonders for you. The
essence of yoga is that through a number of physical exercises (asanas),
general relaxation techniques, a lighter diet (sattvic), good breathing
practice and positive thinking, a person can elevate his condition to
one of real excellence where the mind and body become one for
lasting good health.
Hatha Yoga programs are offered throughout North America and
Europe at inexpensive rates. The programs are relaxing and very
enjoyable. As well, the ideas and exercises are easy to learn when
62
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
guided by a well-trained teacher. If you have yet to try yoga, you are
missing out on one of the very best health tonics and elixirs for youth.
Longevity Secret 5: The Magic of Positive Thoughts & Dreaming
If one advances confidently in the direction of his dreams, and
endeavors to live the life which he has imagined, he will meet with
a success unexpected in common hours.
Thoreau
You have the potential to create a new reality beginning today.
This new reality can be one of superb health, abundant prosperity and
absolute bliss. You too can meet with a success unexpected in common
hours. The preceding pages have provided you with numerous
strategies for mastering your mind, body and spirit. Precise exercises
and powerful routines appear in the 30 day MegaLiving! program
which follows at the end of this book. But through all the principles,
through all the meditations and techniques, one burning truth stands
out above all the rest. That truth is the most potent secret of longevity,
peak health and life mastery.
That truth is simply stated: your thoughts control your world. If you
firmly stand guard at the door of your mind and let only the very best
thoughts enter, you will be happy, healthy and serene. If you let
thoughts of negative past and future experiences dominate your mind,
you will be burdened by them, you will never enjoy bliss and you will
not even come close to the state known as perfect health. Be a firm
guardian of each and every thought that enters your mind and make
certain it is of the highest quality.
As an avid gardener tends daily to her garden, nurturing it with
all that is good, you must nurture and cultivate your mind. If you do
this and zealously guard against the weeds which will attempt to take
root by thinking positive, inspiring thoughts only, you will see great
things blossom. Everything is created twice - first in your mind and
then in the outside world. Just as a builder first designs a building on
paper before he starts to build it, you must create all that you desire in
your mind’s eye. If you do this, if you dream great dreams and good
thoughts, forces which you never understood will be activated to bring
you to your goals.
63
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
Change your thoughts and you will radically alter your life.
Think of perfect health and you will undoubtedly have it. See yourself
as a confident, strong and passionate person within your imagination
and you will soon transform into this vision. See yourself as a wealthy
person, think this thought for twenty or thirty minutes daily with true
belief in its attainment and you will have it.
Thoughts combined with the emotion of faith and belief yield
phenomenal results. If you wish to perfect your body, first perfect your
mind. Be a strong warrior, determined to think happy, wonderful
thoughts only. Slay any thought that is not powerful and conducive to
the mindset of a winner at life’s game. You are the master of your
thoughts. The sooner you realize this as well as the control that we
have all been given over our thinking process, the sooner you will see
real and lasting self-mastery. You are responsible for your thoughts.
With practice and discipline, you will reign supreme over each and
every thought in your mind. You will then create a personal destiny
second to none.
As stated by James Allen in the excellent little book, As a Man
Thinketh: “As the physically weak man can make himself strong by
careful and patient training, so the man of weak thoughts can make
them strong by exercising himself in right thinking.” So what is the
secret of longevity and personal excellence? Master your thoughts and
you will master your mind; master your mind and you will master your
body; master your body and you will feel as you have never felt before
- you will feel perfect health.
The ancient thinkers arrived at the conclusion that thoughts are
things and, like every other thing in this world, they are made up of
energy. So with every thought, you have actually created something.
You have sent a mental messenger from your mind out into the world.
And this messenger, if it is of the correct nature, will influence all
aspects of your material life as the energy of the thought influences the
energy of all matter. Positive thinking is not some abstract concept.
Rather, it is grounded in the physical principles of the world. Thought
is matter and thoughts influence matter. This is why belief in your
desires and goals is so very powerful and can reshape your life. Miracles
happen every day. Cancer patients have reportedly been cured by a
64
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
diet of positive thinking and laughter after traditional medical
treatments have failed. People who have had nothing have pulled
themselves up to greatness by making a decision to make their lives
better and then taking action to ensure that this happened. Is there
any doubt that in your mind, you hold the most incredible instrument
of change and success ever created?
You have learned of the power of your mind. This ten pound
mass sitting between your shoulders can create whatever it is that you
want. Master your thoughts and you will soon become the master of
your inner world. And once you master your inner world, exceptional
personal effectiveness, greater peace of mind, far more productivity,
ideal health and lifelong success will await you. Success on the outside
begins with success on the inside. The MegaLiving! 30 Day Program
will show you how to run and further condition your mind. It is the
ultimate owner’s manual for your greatest asset. If you commit yourself
to the simple exercises given to you, you will take the most important
step of your life, the first step to mastering your mind and, thus, your
world.
65
66 MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
Before you can ever hope to change your circumstances, you must first
improve yourself. If you want to lead a company, learn to lead yourself
first. If you want to manage a family or a team, learn to manage yourself
first. Self-mastery is the DNA of life mastery. The starting point is, as
always, with your thoughts. The surface of your thoughts is your
character. All of the thoughts which dominate your mind, come
together like the wires of a powerful cable to create your character. If
you have weak thoughts, you will most certainly have a weak
character. Be a strongly disciplined thinker and you are assured of a
strong, unstoppable character. A character rich with integrity, courage
and trustworthiness is the bedrock of lifelong success.
THE PLEASURES OF PROACTIVITY
You are responsible for everything that happens to you in your
life. You can make your existence a shining example of personal and
professional excellence or you can make your life miserable. You can
choose a nirvana or a nightmare. The key is to realize that you have
the power to see problems as challenges and to take any action
required to have what you want. The quality of your life is determined
by your interpretation of what happens to you.
67
Everyone knows that weeds eat out the life of the garden and of the
productive fields. The gardener and the farmer alike each has to keep
the weeding process alive... It’s like that in the building and
developing of character. No one knows our faults and tendencies
better than we do ourselves, so that it is up to each one of us to keep
the weeds out, and to keep all growth vigorous and fruitful.
George Matthew Adams
CHAPTER FOUR
Your Character: Attaining Public Excellence
& Private Victory
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
Being proactive means you no longer chalk up past failures or
lack of achievement to your family background or personal
circumstances. Being proactive means that you no longer cry over spilt
milk and complain about the hand this world has dealt you. You are
“pro-active”: for action.
You must exercise your proactivity muscles to develop the
mindset of a true champion. You must see yourself as a little god on this
earth, one who has all the qualities required for great success and a
burning desire to achieve it. If you have such dreams, you will indeed
find a way to achieve them. Ghandi, Ford, Lincoln, Bell, Kennedy and
Salk all did and so can you.
All highly successful people are proactive. They view setbacks
and failures as lessons and see mistakes as wonderful opportunities to
grow. They have come to understand that pain is a teacher and there are no
negative events in life, only outcomes which you can choose to view in a
positive light if you wish. Study any rose and its stem. Some will see it as
a rosebush with a few little thorns along the way. Others might see it
as a thornbush with a little rose at the end. The object of study is the
same, what is different is your interpretation.
Once you develop the essential habit of thinking effectively, a
new reality will unfold. When you begin to realize that you hold in
your mind infinite power to shape your destiny, wonderful things start
to happen. More than likely, you are only using 25% of your mind’s
incredible potential, at best. What about the rest? Are you really
willing to waste the billions of brain cells that you have been given and
the marvel we call the human body on a life of mediocrity? This book
is your wake up call. In the twinkling of an eye, this very second you
can transform your life. Make the decision and the commitment to be
the very best you can be.
Being proactive means you shape circumstances and they do not
shape you. You have the choice of interpreting any event that has
happened in the past or that will unfold in the future according to your
wishes. For example, if someone is particularly insulting to you, you
have a choice as to how you interpret the event. The average person
becomes angry and repeatedly asks himself why someone would do this
- pushing himself into a negative, fully unproductive state. The person
68
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
who has developed proactivity appreciates that he has the power to
interpret the event in a manner to empower him. As Eleanor
Roosevelt said: “no one can hurt you without your consent.” Ghandi
put it another way: “they cannot take our self-respect if we do not give
it to them.” The key is the interpretation of the action and to choose
to see the event as one that will help you grow. You may make the
following interpretations from an otherwise negative circumstance of
someone being rude to you:
i) Poor fellow, what can I do to help him - he must be having a bad
day.
ii) How can I learn from this event and use it as a growth experience
on my path to life mastery?
iii) Everything happens for a reason and something positive will come
out of this situation.
iv) What will happen to me (both physically and mentally) if I let this
minor incident bother me? Am I majoring in minor things?
v) I must see myself as an orange - when squeezed, only what is inside
will come out. If I have truly cultivated serenity, kindness and selfcontrol,
only these wonderful qualities will appear. If negative
qualities come out, I still have some work to do on my journey to
personal mastery.
Remember, it is not the snake bite that kills but the venom
which circulates afterwards that is fatal. Do not let the snakebite of
another person release any venom inside of you. You can control its
entry and you are responsible for every thought in your mind. You can
make every day an extraordinary celebration once you control the
thoughts you allow into your mental garden every second of every
minute of every day.
Being proactive means that you can live a blissful existence,
seeing the good in all events unfolding on the beautiful canopy of life.
There is no such thing as an unpleasant experience. Every experience
has the potential to improve an element of your character or to present
a challenge to you which may lift you to a higher level spiritually,
physically, mentally and professionally. True winners see problems as
69
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
great opportunities. Where others fail, they thrive. In any recession,
there are always a handful of entrepreneurs who make their fortune,
the stock players who are buying when everyone else is selling. See the
blue sky above every rain storm - it is there.
Proactivity is the first step to personal mastery. It is really nothing
more than self-control. And self-control, like all essential mastery
qualities, can be developed through patient and consistent
perseverance and regular conditioning. Once you make the choice to
run these muscles on a daily basis, you will take real control of your life
and awaken the true potential that now slumbers deep within you.
Will you accept the challenge?
MOMENTUM ON THE PATH TO MASTERY
There is a magic in momentum. Just as a downhill skier starts off
slowly at the top of the hill but quickly becomes unstoppable as he
progresses down the slope, you can use the momentum created by little
self-mastery successes to guide you to your ultimate goal of a perfect
life.
This is the essence of MegaLiving! Start off small with minor
changes in your mental attitude, in your exercise program, in your diet
and in your life habits. Soon the steps taken grow larger and the results
more tangible until you are finally unstoppable. The journey of a
thousand miles begins with a single step and you must start off small if
you want to achieve big results.
In the area of your mental development, you will start enriching
your mind’s diet with excellent motivational books, positive,
inspirational thoughts and exercises to improve your mental agility
and stamina. At first, you will be spending only a few minutes a day on
this but once you see the dramatic results which appear, you will
become more devoted to realizing the potential of your intellect.
Throughout this book, it has been emphasized that your mind is like
any of the other muscles of the body: you must use it or “lose it”. Not
only must you use it, but if you do not push it and challenge it daily, it
will grow weaker.
If you are not going forward, you are going backward. And if you
constantly feed your mind with wonderful treats and condition it for
70
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
excellence, you will certainly meet with success and happiness not
expected in common hours. It does not matter if you have had a poor
memory in the past or if you have been a negative thinker all of your
life. You can change your focus and your beliefs with a simple
commitment to change and a daily dose of mental practice for at least
30 days (and then maintaining your gains by daily conditioning).
Nothing is more noble in this life than enhancing your mind and
developing your character. Such actions will profoundly improve the
quality of your life and the lives of those that surround you.
The same momentum that will propel your mindset to its highest
levels will take you to physical mastery. You have a deep fountain of
perfect health sleeping serenely inside of you. You must tap into this
ocean of peak health and allow it to express itself. This is exceptionally
important. You must realize the body’s real potential for physical
excellence.
The very best physician is a mind full of good thoughts, thoughts
of hope, courage, strength and bliss. By feeding your body an
equivalent diet of high water content foods (fruits & vegetables) and
other healthful choices, it will regain the youthful form it may have
lost and give you the energy you may have been lacking with a poor,
hard to digest diet. By making small but significant changes in your
diet, you will soon develop an incredible momentum that will build
Habits of Health.
These habits will provide you with the discipline to eat well for
the rest of your life - giving you a better body, better general health and
the motivation to be the very best you can be. Tap into your reservoir
of perfect health and start yourself on the course of MegaLiving! You
will never turn back once you see the results which you are truly
capable of achieving.
A MISSION STATEMENT:
YOUR LIFE PLAN FOR SELF-MASTERY
Without a concrete life plan and precisely defined goals, you are like a
ship drifting aimlessly in the sea. You will go wherever the tide decides
to take you. Such a lifestyle is not only one which leads to little
productivity and personal effectiveness but one which provides little
happiness and even less fulfillment.
71
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
To meet with any lasting success and life mastery, you must chart
your course in advance, planning for the achievement of your dreams
and preparing to deal with the wonderful curves that life deals along
the way. It is essential that you take the time to think deeply about
what you want to hear at your testimonial dinner that was discussed at
the opening of this book and determine what meaning you hope to
attach to your life, what legacy you wish to leave.
Many powerful strategies for goal fulfillment were explained to
you in the Goal-Setting Workshop contained earlier. But every person
truly interested in getting the very most out of life must take the time
to develop a definite mission statement. A mission statement, vital for
real self-mastery, is a capsule statement of your life’s purpose and
objectives. It must come from your deepest core and reflect the
fundamental principles which drive you. It must inspire you and
accurately represent your dreams, ideals and desires.
With a mission statement in place, the meaning of your life and
the course of your life’s path is set (although this does not mean that
your mission cannot change as you develop and progress through life).
With a clear idea of what you now want out of life and the guiding
principles by which you will live, your world becomes filled with a
tremendous sense of security and confidence. When opportunities and
challenges present themselves, you can meet them effectively because
you are certain of the direction in which you are travelling and the
ultimate destination. You simply select that course of action which will
take you where you want to go. Much like the salesman who will get
a large bonus if he meets his target of selling 1000 units of his product
concentrates primarily on only those activities which will lead him to
his goal, a mission statement concentrates your mind on those actions
which are most important to success in your life.
A mission statement allows you to live with greater integrity and
acts as a powerful compass to keep your life pointed towards your
values. If someone suggests you do something contrary to your mission,
you can immediately recognize this and refuse the suggestion. If part of
your mission statement is to always act with kindness and courtesy
because this is the kind of person you aspire to be, when someone
treats you harshly, you will never respond in kind because it would go
72
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
against the core values of your mission. You then remove regret from
your world because you start to act the way you really want to act and
others cannot cause a response that you dislike. You become proactive
rather than reactive. You take charge and have complete control over
each situation. You become principle centered, living in a way
consistent with your fundamental values.
Here are a few of the benefits of a personal mission statement:
i) Clarification of the purpose of your life and its guiding values.
ii) A mission will offer you a constant source of guidance in times of
difficulty or challenge.
iii) It will keep you motivated and act as a personal lighthouse,
pointing you at all times to the principles which you value most.
iv) It will give you a much better sense of balance and allow you to
define your life’s priorities.
v) It will help you to manage your time much better, placing
emphasis on those activities that will yield the greatest results
(80% of life’s real accomplishments come from only 20% of your
activities so put first things first).
A mission statement is really nothing more than a few
paragraphs or pages setting out what your life is about. It should say in
general terms what are the key roles in your life and what you will
achieve at the end of your existence. It should also set out those values
that mean most to you and the qualities you aspire to have.
Develop your mission statement and foster your burning desire to
soar to success. Today and every day that follows, you must tap the
magical source of mastery that is your true potential. Today is the day
you start being far more than you have been in the past. Today is the
day that you stop being a prisoner of gravity and start to explore your
true potential for higher, more successful living.
HOW TO ATTRACT WEALTH & PROSPERITY
Wealth means many things to many people. To a person in the world
of business, it might mean a net worth of $50,000,000. To a person
more focused on the spiritual aspects of life, it may mean the
73
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
attainment of peace of mind and a deep faith in the existence and
powers of a divine being. Most people are searching for some sort of
wealth in their lives and what follows are the time-tested secrets of
achieving it.
The first step to the realization of lasting wealth is to know what
wealth means to you. What is it that you are searching for? Remember
that happiness is not a destination but a way of travelling through life’s
journey. Happiness is not an oasis that lies at the edge of the desert, a
place that you reach only when you are prosperous. Study many of the
greatest success stories of our time and they will say that they were
happiest when they were starting to build their massive fortunes. They
were happiest when they were working against the odds and had the
raging fire of ambition and determination burning in their bellies.
Determine to be happy now, not later. This requires nothing more
than a conscious choice on your part.
Once you have figured out very clearly what wealth means to you
and what your key destination is, the next step is to develop what is
known as a prosperity consciousness. To be wealthy, you must think
wealthy. As with all success, everything begins with the mind since
your outer world reflects your inner world. Recognize that the mind is
a treasure house of power to bring you all the richness you seek. It will
soon come as surely as the night follows the day.
Every man and woman in this world was born to succeed, be
wealthy and be prosperous. The potential for prosperity is one of your
most essential human qualities, whether you realize it or not. If there
is not an abundance of all that you desire in your life, do something
about it and do something this very day. It begins by tapping the
hidden and magical powers of that part of your mind that you may not
even know exists: your subconscious mind.
The subconscious mind, containing infinite wisdom and
capability, is brought to life through your beliefs. It responds to
suggestion, both verbal (autosuggestion) and mental (through the
form of pictures in your mind’s eye). By repetition of phrases directed
to the importance of prosperity in your life, you will soon enter a
wealthy state of mind. This state of mind is the guiding force of every
superachiever before you.
74
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
The beliefs which you hold in this mindset are then impressed on
the subconscious mind which brings forth an abundance of
opportunities for lasting wealth to become your reality. The key is to
let your beliefs and faith in the fact that you will one day grow very
rich penetrate your emotions. To become wealthy, you must feel
wealthy. You must emotionalize your commitment to prosperity and
let every thought you put in your mind dwell on this essential
outcome. When you soak your mind in thoughts of wealth, happiness
and peace, you start to tap and harness the incredible power of the
subconscious mind. It is at this point that your life rises above the
ordinary to the realm of the extraordinary, where it truly belongs.
For hundreds of years, great success stories have learned to
concentrate the limitless power of the subconscious mind which many
claim is the direct link to divine power beyond this material world.
Whether you subscribe to this philosophy or not, it is essential to your
prosperity that you realize that your subconscious mind can do
wonders for you when you feed it the right nutrition in the form of
affirmations (autosuggestion) and mental pictures (visualization).
Here is the best strategy for using your subconscious mind to achieve your
dreams:
1. Get into a very relaxed state using one of the techniques you have
learned in this book.
2. Mentally picture, in tremendous detail what it is you want for ten
minutes.
3. Tell yourself out loud what you desire and that the result will
come.
When you get into a truly relaxed, serene state, the subconscious
part of the mind is most receptive to your suggestion. It will act on your
every wish and make things happen. The essential key is to condition
it just as you condition your subconscious mind for happiness by filling
it with only the very best mental food.
Create your own personal mantras to repeat over and over to
your subconscious mind when it is in this Ideal Action State of deep
relaxation. Load up your mind with vivid pictures of what you will
75
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
look like when you are prosperous. How will you feel? What will your
house, car and family look like? See the many zeroes after the number
one in your bank book. Get emotional. What emotions will flood
through you when you are wealthy? How will you feel about yourself?
In doing this exercise, every single day, you are simply applying
one of the least known but most powerful of the laws of Nature: The
Law of Attraction. This law states that what you constantly and
consistently focus on in your inner world is precisely what you will
receive in your outer world. As you sow in the wonderful garden of the
mind, so shall you reap. Whatever you believe as true in your mind’s
eye will certainly manifest itself in your reality. As Emerson said: “A
man is what he thinks all day long.” Understand this concept and you
become unstoppable.
If you do not have all that you want in life, today is the day to
start the reconditioning process. You are developing that state of
magical thinking known as prosperity consciousness. Soon, you will
start attracting tremendous opportunities and gifts that you never
thought possible. The more you focus on your wishes, the more you
believe deeply in their realization and the more every thought in your
mind is a good one, the more you will receive. Throughout the day,
affirm, “I am attracting great prosperity and wealth.” Also repeat,
“every day in every single way, I am getting better and better.” Never
let go of a tight hold on your dreams. They will all come about. But
first, once and for all, agree that the mind is the source of unlimited
power.
THE LOST ART OF EFFECTIVE PERSONAL
MANAGEMENT
Before you can do wonders in the outside world, you must first raise
your standards about what you can do in your inner world. The essence
of effective personal management is effective mind management. And
the essence of effective mind management is mental discipline which
is nothing more that controlling each and every thought to ensure that
it is a useful and good one. Every thought concentrated in the
direction of your dreams is like a little nugget of gold, advancing you
confidently in the direction of lasting life wealth.
76
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
When your every thought is in the direction of where you want
to go in your life, that is in the direction written clearly in your mission
statement, your actions follow and become productive ones.
Everything is created twice: once as a blueprint in the mind’s eye and
later in your reality. The process is very similar to the work of an
architect who first draws a sketch and plan of the way things will look
in the new building and then methodically follows this blueprint to
create the structure.
The guiding principle of effective personal management is a
simple one: put your life goals first. The things which truly matter to
you should never take a backseat to those which matter very little. By
your mission statement, you know very precisely what matters most to
you. It may be becoming the very best family man that you can be or
the kindest mother ever to walk the face of this earth. Your life’s goals
may be to become wildly rich or famous. Perhaps you have determined
that you want to be a doctor or a professional athlete. Part of your
mission may be to develop your character to the fullest or get into
super shape by creating a winner’s mindset. Your mission might also
include the goal of achieving peace of mind and inner serenity. Any of
these dreams are attainable, you have learned that. The key now is to
see that every thought and action taken in the direction of these goals
will get you closer to them. Remember the 80/20 Rule: 80% of the
results come from 20% of your activities. Recognize which activities
will make the difference in your life and get you to where you want to
go. Then focus your energy and attention on these. This is one of the
best Secrets of Successful Living.
Every step in another direction, no matter how pleasant it might
be, will keep you that much farther from what you have already
determined means most to you in your life. Therefore, the overriding
principle is to never let what matters most to you be sacrificed to those
things that matter the least.
Your time and daily activities all exist within the three points of
the Triangle of Personal Management. As you will see in the diagram
which follows, your actions fall somewhere within Segments 1, 2 or 3
(S1, S2 or S3) and the Heart of the Triangle.
77
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
The Triangle of Personal Management
S1 reflects activities which you might be doing which are pleasurable
but of no value (i.e., television often falls into this segment of the
triangle; you enjoy watching it but recognize it really gets you
nowhere). S2 reflects those activities which appear productive and
important but which really have little “Big Picture” value because they
do not advance your mission and life goals. For example, you might
spend a lot of time over a year learning to be an expert in computers
but it is really time wasted if your life’s primary goal is to be a concert
pianist and a first class amateur athlete. These are immediate things
which occupy your time but have no value in the overall scheme of
things when you really step back and consider them (these activities
range from needless meetings to dead-end jobs). S3 reflects those crisis
activities that always require our attention whether we like it or not.
These are the little brush fires and urgent matters which often appear
as we journey through life and take up an undue amount of our energy.
In the center of the Triangle of Personal Management is the
Heart of the Triangle. When you have thought deeply about what you
truly want out of your life, when you know what your life’s mission and
meaning is, this place will be your home. When every thought is in the
direction of your goals and dreams, almost every second of your time
will be spent in the Heart of the Triangle. And when it is, your life will
take on enormous power. You will become the strong master of your
mind, body and character. You will realize that nothing is impossible
78
The Heart
of the
Triangle
S1
S2 S3
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
and that your dreams are not beyond your grasp. You will reach this
level of thinking and you will visit this place very soon if you stay
committed, enthusiastic and concentrated on the limitless possibilities
of your life. This is not a place for a select few people. This is a place
where you belong with all others who raise their lives beyond the
mundane to the infinite. This is a place where hopes and desires all
come true.
Study the Triangle of Personal Management and commit yourself
to living your life within the Heart of the Triangle. This will not be a
restricting way to live but a very freeing way of organizing your life
according to your dreams and guiding principles. You start to develop
unshakable confidence and security as well as an appreciation for the
value of time and the limitless achievement which is your potential.
Living your life according to the Triangle of Personal
Management is not just one way to live, it is the only way to organize
your life. If you study every great superachiever, if you study anyone
who has arrived at their Perfect Life, you will see that they live by the
Triangle. This is not just a time management matrix, this is a life
management matrix. A golden rule for effective and productive living
is a strikingly simple one: time mastery is life mastery. Guard your time,
it is your most valuable commodity. Once it passes through your hands,
it is gone forever. Time is the great leveller. John F. Kennedy, Bruce Lee
and Isaac Newton all had precisely the same amount of time as you
have. We all start off every day with a twenty-four hour gift. What
separates the peak performers from the weak performers is how this gift
is used.
Balance is another key ingredient of the highly-developed
achiever. It is essential to live a life of balance. Thousands of years ago,
in ancient India it was written in the Bhagavad Gita that one should
never live a life of extremes. Every person must strive for a balance
between moderation and the burning desire to fulfill one’s potential.
By living with both eyes firmly planted in the direction of your goals,
you do not lose the balance and fun that this world has to offer. First,
there is nothing more fun than attaining your goals. Second, your life
goals (your mission) must be sufficiently thought out to maintain the
essential balance in life. For example, your mission statement should
79
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
include life goals such as being the most adventurous person you know
or the most balanced, relaxed person anywhere. A good mission will
keep you on track but also well-rounded.
8 KEYS TO THE PATH OF MASTERY
We live in a “quick-fix” society. We want everything in a flash. Faxes
send information across the world in a matter of seconds and
computers can tap the knowledge of the ages with a couple of key
strokes. We want fast food, fast service and fast learning. But some
things do take time, disciplined effort and hard work. You have taken
the time to get this far in the book. You have sacrificed other things to
commit yourself to being the very best you can be by studying the
strategies of MegaLiving! Part II will reveal to you the 200 Master
Secrets to Success while Part III contains the breakthrough 30 Day
Program to Life-Mastery. But before you move on to the next part,
please consider what mastery is all about.
What is mastery? Mastery is a state of performance one reaches
where every action in the mastered activity reflects unconscious
excellence. Think of the martial arts master who has achieved a 5th
degree black belt. He no longer has to think about each of the
movements he must take to strike a blow or execute a kick through a
wooden board. When this master throws a punch, he does not think
to himself “first I must raise my arm, then I must pull it back and finally
I must release it with tremendous force to strike at my intended target.”
Rather, after many hundreds of days of consistent and concentrated
practice, he has reached a level of performance where a punch can fly
as easily as the master breathes.
The same is true for the concert pianist, the elite athlete or the
top flight trial lawyer who, once on her feet in the courtroom, enters a
zone or mental state where every ounce of focus is on the case before
the judge. Nothing else matters and time has no meaning. The true
master, when engaged in the mastered activity, lives purely in the
moment. You have had such experiences. Think of the times when
you played sports and were in a very challenging game. Nothing else
was on your mind and nothing else mattered. Hours passed by like
minutes and you experienced true Bliss and joy.
80
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
“A man possesses nothing certainly save a brief loan of his own
body yet the body of man is capable of much curious pleasure,” wrote
J. B. Cabell. We are capable of exceptional pleasure and happiness in
our lives. The state of the true master, where time slips merrily by while
the activity is being performed, has been called the state of Flow and
can be cultivated. Just as the karate master enters this ideal
performance state during his practice or competition, you can tap Flow
in your daily life after you have mastered your mind, body and spirit.
Flow is nothing more than the ideal state of concentrated attention
but it provides an almost magical feeling.
Mastery and the state of Flow intersect at the point of living in
the moment. All masters live in the moment and all individuals who
have mastered their lives enjoy Flow. What all of these people have in
common is the skill of making every moment count and thinking only
of what matters most in their lives in every minute to the exclusion of
other less productive, trivial thoughts.
The young woman who grew up in poverty dreams of one day
becoming the world’s best eye surgeon. When she concentrates her
attention on this goal with the force of a laser beam, not only does she
set into play incredible forces which start moving to bring about her
desire, she also starts to live in each moment and with true happiness.
Her mind is on what she wants. She thinks of little else and her
activities are the result of a strong mind with its attention in the
correct direction.
This woman’s energies are not dissipated by worry or by other
life-sucking mental diseases that distract the average person from
living up to their real potential. This woman understands the Laws of
Nature and knows the nature of the mind. She knows that her mind,
with its goal seeking Success Mechanism, will do what she has
instructed it to do. She now sets about to take dedicated action to get
what she wants with faith in its attainment. This woman has set about
on the path of mastery and will start to experience Flow on a regular,
if not daily basis. She will start to experience Bliss and deep peace. She
starts to realize that her life is indeed a perfect one.
The path of mastery rises above the world of the “quick-fix.”
Mastery of your mind, body and character, just like mastery of any
81
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
other activity, requires discipline, persistence and hard work. But the
results will change every element of your life and you will understand
that there truly is no more noble cause than strengthening yourself.
The 8 Keys to the Path of Mastery
THE FIRST KEY TO MASTERY: Commitment & Desire
As with every important goal, it is essential to know your
outcome and precisely what you want. Sit down and assess your desire.
Is it a worthy, productive one? What benefits will you receive through
mastery of the activity in question? Then make a decision to reach the
point of mastery. Make a pact with yourself to do whatever it takes to
get to your goal. Think how you will feel as a master of the desired
activity. Think about the confidence that this will inspire in you. You
are a person of character, push yourself to achieve what you want.
THE SECOND KEY TO MASTERY: Knowledge & Instruction
Once you are certain of your outcome, become determined to
amass a storehouse of knowledge on the subject you want to master.
The answers to everything you would want to know are out there. All
of life’s mistakes have already been made. Is there really a need for you
to make them all again?
Talk to people who have become masters. What did they do to
achieve their success? Read books on the subject, listen to cassettes
and attend seminars to understand what it is you must do to advance
on your chosen path of mastery. Seek out the very best instruction
possible and listen to what you are taught. Learn to associate a
tremendous amount of pleasure with learning. You will never be
disappointed and your life will become one inspiring adventure.
THE THIRD KEY TO MASTERY: Kaizen & Consistent Practice
You have learned about the wonders of Kaizen, constant and
never-ending improvement, in an earlier section. To gain total mastery
of yourself, you must do something every day to develop yourself and
your potential. This is nothing more than practice and the
development of good habits which will help you reach the higher
levels to which you aspire.
82
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
A martial arts student must practice regularly if he desires a black
belt. At first the workouts are hard and seem like drudgery. The
student asks himself, “why am I putting myself through this?” After
three weeks of practice, the student notices transformations. The
workouts get easier, he develops more stamina and endurance and his
technique looks better. Soon his confidence increases and he starts to
have fun with the activity. The student is now on the path to mastery
and, in time, will definitely get there.
Any changes in one’s life habits cause discomfort at first.
Exercising, meditation or the daily habit of filling your mind with new
ideas for personal growth might be hard at first. But every time you
push yourself past any obstacles, you make yourself that much stronger.
The next time becomes a little easier.
THE FOURTH KEY TO MASTERY: Persistence
No path is free of challenges and obstacles. This is the way of
Nature. Little hurdles appear to offer you tests and opportunities to
refine and expand yourself. Think of all of the problems you have
encountered in your lifetime. Have you learned a lesson from every
one of them? Most people have. And yet the average person avoids
problems like the plague rather than embracing them and realizing
that every difficulty will pass and leave us with little nuggets of wisdom
that we can use in other areas of our lives.
The real key to mastery of yourself is persistence. Nothing can
stop the person who simply refuses to be stopped. There is a solution
to every problem and if you want something bad enough, you will find
a way to achieve it. There is no success story without the presence of
persistence. Cultivate this quality, it will never let you down.
THE FIFTH KEY TO MASTERY: Raise Your Standards and Keep Pushing
A famous international boxing champion was once asked the
secret to his phenomenal physique and fitness level. He said, “I daily
exercise my body against great resistance.” Pushing his muscles against
tremendous weight built him up into the elite athlete that he became.
The same physical principle applies to your mind and the mastery of
your inner and outer world.
83
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
On a daily basis, you must exert your will-power to do those
things which you may not like to do. Peak performers do things that
unsuccessful people don’t like to do even though they too might dislike
doing them. Do that which you fear and the fear vanishes into thin air
never to return. When that feeling of procrastination sets in just as you
are about to sit down to that long overdue project, throw it off and tap
your true strength of character to get the job done. Each time you
overcome these weak tendencies that may have held you back in the
past, you take a bold step in the direction of your dreams. Each time
you push yourself, just like pushing your muscles when you exercise,
you grow tougher and more forceful. Soon what was once hard
becomes easy.
It is essential to raise your standards on a regular basis, every
master does. Everyone reaches a plateau in any activity. You know you
are at this level when things become too easy and the challenge is
gone. Things get boring just like a life without difficulties and
challenges. Fight against staying on the plateau. To expand, grow and
prosper, your aim must be set high on the stars. Keep getting better
every day. Never accept anything but the very best from yourself. This
is your essential nature, tap into it.
THE SIXTH KEY TO MASTERY: Even the Teachers Have Teachers
Always keep an open mind. No matter how disciplined and
successful you become, remember that even the giants have teachers.
There is no one on this planet that cannot learn more, improve more
and live a better life.
As soon as you close your mind to new opportunities and ideas,
you close off a part of your self-mastery path and your quest will be
harder to carry out. Maintain a sense of humility and realize that you
can learn something from everyone. Every person that you meet every
day is a teacher of some sort. Listen to what they have to say and open
yourself to the knowledge that exists for the taking.
THE SEVENTH KEY TO MASTERY: Have Fun and Enjoy the Journey of
the Master
If you follow and apply the concepts you have learned so far
along with the 30 Day Program, you are assured of reaching a state of
84
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
self-mastery and lasting Bliss. But you have learned earlier that
happiness is not a destination that is to be reached after a long trek
through this world. Rather, happiness is a manner of travelling
through your life. One of the greatest truths is that every moment of
every day is pure perfection, whether you realize it or not. There is no
chaos in the world and everything happens for a reason. Today, realize
the perfection and wonders of your life and do not waste a single
minute in regret about things in the past. The past has no relevance to
your future and the achievements of which you are capable.
As you refine yourself, developing your mind power, your body
and Perfect Health along with your character, enjoy the journey
towards your goals. Have fun and be playful. Every master through the
ages has known and applied this principle for the Miracle of Successful
Living.
THE EIGHTH KEY TO MASTERY: Share Your Knowledge and Serve
Others
When all the wisdom of the wisest thinkers and philosophers
throughout history is distilled, the purpose of our existence becomes
clarified. The overriding objective of our lives stands high above all
other pursuits and is simply stated: we are here to give to others. The
purpose of life is a life of purpose and a life of purpose is created
through constant service to those around us. When all is said and
done, no matter how much money you make, how high you rise in
your company, how respected an entrepreneur you are or how great a
parent you become, the quality of your life will be measured by the
quality of your contribution. One of the greatest of all of the master
keys to lifelong success is serve others and the quality of your own life
will profoundly improve. Do not let even one day slip by without
practising “random acts of kindness and senseless acts of beauty.”
Another ageless truth, and one that the wise sages of the East
have spoken of for centuries is the following: “live for each day and
celebrate every moment.” Seize and savour every single day because it
is a miracle. So often we put off happiness to a later date. We will take
that romantic weekend with our spouse when we get that promotion.
We will teach our child to play the saxophone or take her to a sporting
match when the workload gets lighter. We promise ourselves that we
85
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
will make time for daily self-renewal or take the time to read all those
great books sitting in our den when the big project we are working on
is finally completed or when we become the top salesperson at our
company. But so often a fundamental principle escapes us: success is a
journey, not a destination. Every day is a miracle, no matter how much
the phone rings, no matter how high your “in basket” gets and no
matter how many bills remain to be paid.
Make time for yourself every day. Enjoy the journey as you pass
through life. Invest in yourself. Watch a sunrise at least once a week.
Take an afternoon off after a gruelling work week and go to the movies.
Understand the power of silence and be still for a change. Learn to
love sunsets, the sound of laughing kids and deep friendships. Escape
from the telephone once in a while and enjoy life’s simpler pleasures.
Rekindle the habit of laughter, play soothing music (and actually do
nothing but listen to it) and plan times to rest and relax. Taking the
time for personal renewal is essential for self-mastery. It will make you
more, not less, productive, efficient and creative.
As you move through the next sections of MegaLiving! you will
learn practical and easy-to-apply strategies that will boost your
personal and professional success. You will learn the 200 Master
Secrets for living a far richer, happier and vital life. These secrets are
the direct result of over ten years of study into the finest success tools
of both the West and the East. You will also discover the power of the
30 Day Program for Life Mastery. After a very short period of using the
simple techniques offered, you will note striking transformations in
yourself. You will have the energy and focus to do all that you want,
you will have greater peace of mind, you will have more confidence,
more vitality and more passion to pursue your dreams. You will note
distinct improvements in your health, wealth and character. You will
grow fundamentally different and start to live in a new, more magical
reality.
As you expand the limits of your mind, body and character and
as you soar to higher levels of personal achievement and fulfillment,
remember to enjoy the journey and savour the special moments. To
me, the following definition of success is the best I have read:
86
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
To laugh often and love much; to win the respect of intelligent
persons and the affection of children; to earn the approbation of
honest critics; to appreciate beauty; to give of one’s self, to leave
the world a bit better, whether by a healthy child, a garden patch
or a redeemed social condition; to have played and laughed with
enthusiasm and sung with exultation; to know even one life has
breathed easier because you have lived - that is to have
succeeded.
Ralph Waldo Emerson
87
88 MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
I have always wanted to write this book. The fact that you are reading
it makes it clear that you are committed to reaching for the very best
that you can be in all facets of your life - be it personal, professional,
financial or spiritual. You seek excellence and this book will inspire
you to attain it. It is a total guide to fulfilling the great potential that
exists within all of us and a motivator to assist you in reaching greater
heights. We have the power to change and to constantly excel - this is
part of what makes us human. Each one of us has the power to achieve
great things - each one of us. The key is to learn the philosophies,
strategies and techniques which will allow for a realization of our
greatness.
But this book is more than the common self-growth guides that
those committed to success regularly read. This book contains wisdom
of the ages that will allow you to develop your leadership skills,
enhance your relations with anyone you come into contact with,
develop a deeper understanding of human nature and strengthen your
personal character. It will allow you to view life from the highest level
and constantly perform at your peak. Nutrition, personal renewal and
proven confidence enhancement techniques are provided as are
relaxation strategies and other mind conditioning methods that will
89
Wisdom thoroughly learned will never be forgotten.
Pythagoras
PART TWO
The 200 Master Secrets for MegaLiving!
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
improve your focus, creativity, memory and overall well-being.
In Part I, you were exposed to the powerful techniques of selfsuggestion,
goal-setting, proper breathing and visualization used by
peak performers ranging from the elite athletes of the West to the yogis
of India and the martial arts masters of ancient China. Many
thousands of people have used these simple skills to profoundly
improve the quality of their lives - and so can you. You also explored
tools to improve your concentration, mental toughness, discipline and
will-power as well as noting eastern philosophies on longevity, ideal
health and the habit of happiness. Part I of this book has given you the
essential strategies of life mastery and personal excellence. Part II now
gives you the Top 200 Success Secrets of MegaLiving!
90
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
THE TOP 200 SECRETS OF
SUCCESS AND THE PILLARS OF SELF-MASTERY
1. Sleep less. This is one of the best investments you can make to
make your life more productive and rewarding. Most people do not
need more than 6 hours to maintain an excellent state of health. Try
getting up one hour earlier for 21 days and it will develop into a
powerful habit. Remember, it is the quality not the quantity of sleep
that is important. And just imagine having an extra 30 hours a month
to spend on the things that are important to you.
2. Set aside one hour every morning for personal development
matters. Meditate, visualize your day, read inspirational texts to set the
tone of your day, listen to motivational tapes or read great literature.
Take this quiet period to vitalize and energize your spirit for the
productive day ahead. Watch the sun rise once a week or be with
nature. Starting the day off well is a powerful strategy for self-renewal
and personal effectiveness.
3. Do not allow those things that matter the most in your life be at
the mercy of activities that matter the least. Every day, take the time
to ask yourself the question “is this the best use of my time and
energy?” Time management is life management so guard your time
with great care.
4. Use the rubber band method to condition your mind to focus
solely on the most positive elements in your life. Place a rubber band
around your wrist. Each time a negative, energy sapping thought enters
your mind, snap the rubber band. Through the power of conditioning,
your mind will associate pain with negative thinking and you will soon
possess a strongly positive mindset.
5. Always answer the phone with enthusiasm in your voice and
show your appreciation for the caller. Good phone manners are
essential. To convey authority on the line, stand up. This will instill
further confidence in your voice.
6. Throughout the day we all get inspiration and excellent ideas.
Keep a set of cards (the size of business cards; available at most
91
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
stationary stores) in your wallet along with a pencil to jot down these
insights. When you get home, put the ideas in a central place such as
a coil notepad and review them from time to time. As noted by Oliver
Wendell Holmes: “Man’s mind, once stretched by a new idea, never
regains its original dimensions.”
7. Set aside every Sunday evening for yourself and be strongly
disciplined with this habit. Use this period to plan your week, visualize
your encounters and what you want to achieve, to read new materials
and inspirational books, to listen to soft soothing music and to simply
relax. This habit will serve as your anchor to keep you focused,
motivated and effective throughout the coming week.
8. Always remember the key principle that the quality of your life
is the quality of your communication. This means the way you
communicate with others and, more importantly, the way you
communicate with yourself. What you focus on is what you get. If you
look for the positive this is what you get. This is a fundamental law of
Nature.
9. Stay on purpose, not on outcome. In other words, do the task
because it is what you love to do or because it will help someone or is
a valuable exercise. Don’t do it for the money or the recognition.
Those will come naturally. This is the way of the world.
10. Laugh for five minutes in the mirror each morning. Steve Martin
does. Laughter activates many beneficial chemicals within the body
that place us into a very joyous state. Laughter also returns the body to
a state of balance. Laughter therapy has been regularly used to heal
persons with varied ailments and is a wonderful tonic for life’s ills.
While the average 4 year old laughs 500 times a day, the average adult
is lucky to laugh 15 times a day. Revitalize the habit of laughter, it will
put far more living into your life.
11. Light a candle beside you when you are reading in the evening.
It is most relaxing and creates a wonderful, soothing atmosphere.
Make your home an oasis from the frenzied world outside. Fill it with
great music, great books and great friends.
12. To enhance your concentration and powers of focus, count your
steps when you walk. This is a particularly strong technique. Take six
92
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
steps while taking a long inhale, hold your breath for another six steps,
and then exhale for six steps. If six steps is too long for the breaths, do
whatever you feel comfortable with. You will feel very alert, refreshed,
internally quiet and centered after this exercise. So many people allow
their minds to be filled with mental chatter. All peak performers
appreciate the power of a quiet, clear mind which will concentrate
steadily on all important tasks.
13. Learn to meditate effectively. The mind is naturally a very noisy
machine which wants to move from one subject to another like an
unchained monkey. One must learn to restrain and discipline it if one
is to achieve anything of substance and to be peaceful. Meditation for
twenty minutes in the morning and twenty minutes in the evening
will certainly provide you with exceptional results if regularly practiced
for six months. Learned sages of the East have been advancing the
many benefits of meditation for over 5000 years.
14. Learn to be still. The average person doesn’t spend even 30
minutes a month in total silence and tranquility. Develop the skill of
sitting quietly, enjoying the powerful silence for at least ten minutes a
day. Simply think about what is important to you in your life. Reflect
on your mission. Silence indeed is golden. As the Zen master once
said, it is the space between the bars that holds the cage.
15. Enhance your will-power; it is likely one of the best training
programs you can invest in. Here are some ideas to strengthen your
will and become a stronger person:
a) Do not let your mind float like a piece of paper in the wind.
Work hard to keep it focused at all times. When doing a task, think of
nothing else. When walking to work, count the steps that it takes to
get all the way to the office. This is not easy but your mind will soon
understand that you hold its reins and not vice versa. Your mind must
eventually become as still as a candle flame in a corner where there is
no draft.
b) Your will is like a muscle. You must first exercise it and then
push before it gets stronger. This necessarily involves short term pain
but be assured that the improvements will come and will touch your
character in a most positive way. When you are hungry, wait another
93
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
hour before your meal. When you are labouring over a difficult task
and your mind is prompting you to pick up the latest magazine for a
break or to get up and go talk to a friend, curb the impulse. Soon you
will be able to sit for hours in a precisely concentrated state. Sir Issac
Newton, one of the greatest classical physicists the world has
produced, once said: “if I have done the public any service, it is due to
patient thought.” Newton had a remarkable ability to sit quietly and
think without interruption for very long periods of time. If he can
develop this so can you.
c) You can also build your will-power by restraint in your conduct
with others. Speak less (use the 60/40 Rule = listen 60% of the time
and speak a mere 40%, if that). This will not only make you more
popular but you will learn much wisdom as everyone we meet, every
day has something to teach us. Also restrain the urge to gossip or to
condemn someone who you feel has made a mistake. Stop
complaining and develop a cheerful, vital and strong personality. You
will greatly influence others.
d) When a negative thought comes to your mind, immediately
replace it with one that is positive. Positive always dominates over the
negative and your mind has to be conditioned to think only the best
thoughts. Negative thinking is a conditioned process whereby the
negative patterns are established over and over. Rid yourself of any
limitations and become a powerful positive thinker.
16. Make an effort to be humorous throughout the day. Not only is
it beneficial from a physical viewpoint but it diffuses tension in
difficult circumstances and creates an excellent atmosphere wherever
you are. It was recently reported that members of the Tauripan tribe of
South America have a ritual where they awake in the middle of the
night to tell each other jokes. Even tribesmen in the deepest sleep
wake to enjoy the laugh and then return to their state of slumber in
seconds.
17. Become a highly disciplined time manager. There are roughly
168 hours in a week. This surely allows plenty of time for achievement
of the many goals we desire to accomplish. Be ruthless with your time.
Set aside a few minutes each morning to plan your day. Plan around
your priorities and focus on not only those tasks which are immediate
94
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
but not important (i.e., many telephone calls) but especially on those
which are important but not urgent, for these allow for the greatest
personal and professional development. Important but not immediate
activities are those which produce long-term, sustainable benefits and
include exercise, strategic planning, the development of relationships
and professional education. Never let the things which matter most be
placed in the backseat as compared to those that matter least.
18. Associate only with positive, focused people who you can learn
from and who will not drain your valuable energy with complaining
and uninspiring attitudes. By developing relationships with those
committed to constant improvement and the pursuit of the best that
life has to offer, you will have plenty of company on your path to the
top of whatever mountain you seek to climb.
19. Stephen Hawking, one of the great modern physicists of the
world, is reported to have said that we are on a minor planet of a very
average star located within the outer limits of one of a hundred
thousand million galaxies. Are your problems really significant in light
of this? You walk this Earth for but a short time. Why not become
devoted to having only a wonderful experience. Why not dedicate
yourself to leaving a powerful legacy to the world? Sit down now and
write out a list of all that you have in your life. Start first with your
health or your family - the things we often take for granted. Put down
the country we live in and the food we eat. Do not stop until you have
written down fifty items. Once every few days, go through this list -
you will be uplifted and recognize the richness of your existence.
20. You must have a mission statement in life. This is simply a set of
guiding principles which clearly state where you are going and where
you want to be at the end of your life. A mission statement embodies
your values. It is your personal lighthouse keeping you steadily on the
course of your dreams. Over a period of one month, set a few hours
aside to write down five or ten principles which will govern your life
and which will keep you focused at all times. Examples might be to
consistently serve others, to be a considerate citizen, to become highly
wealthy or to serve as a powerful leader. Whatever the mission
statement of your life, refine it and review it regularly. Then when
something adverse happens or someone tries to pull you off course, you
quickly and precisely return to your chosen path with the full
95
96 MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
knowledge that you are moving in the direction that you have
selected.
21. No one can insult or hurt you without your permission. One of
the golden keys to happiness and great success is the way you interpret
events which unfold before you. Highly successful people are master
interpreters. People who have attained greatness have an ability which
they have developed to interpret negative or disempowering events as
positive challenges which will assist them in growing and moving even
farther up the ladder of success. There are no negative experiences
only experiences which aid in your development and toughen your
character so that you may soar to new heights. There are no failures,
only lessons.
22. Take a speed reading course. Reading is a powerful way to gain
many years of experience from a few hours of study. For example, most
biographies reflect the strategies and philosophies of great leaders or
courageous individuals. Read them and model them. Speed reading
will allow you to digest large quantities of material in relatively small
periods of time.
23. Remember people’s names and treat everyone well. This habit,
along with enthusiasm, is one of the great success secrets. Everyone in
this world wears an imaginary button that screams out “I WANT TO
FEEL IMPORTANT AND APPRECIATED!”.
24. Be soft as a flower when it comes to kindness but tough as
thunder when it comes to principle. Be courteous and polite at all
times but never be pushed around. Ensure that you are always treated
with respect.
25. Never discuss your health, wealth and other personal matters
with anyone outside of your immediate family. Be very disciplined in
this regard.
26. Be truthful, patient, persevering, modest and generous.
27. Soak in a warm bath at the end of a long, productive day. Reward
yourself for even the smallest of achievement. Take time out for
renewal of your mind, body and spirit. Soon all your more important
goals will be met and you will move to the next level of peak
performance.
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
28. Learn the power of breathing and its relationship with your
energy source. The mind is intimately connected with your breathing.
For example, when the mind is agitated, your breathing becomes quick
and shallow. When you are relaxed and focused, your breathing is deep
and calm. By practising deep, abdominal breathing, you will develop a
calm, serene demeanour that will remain cool in the hottest of
circumstances. Remember the rule of the Eastern mountain men: “to
breathe properly is to live properly.”
29. Recognize and cultivate the power of autosuggestion. It works
and is an essential tool in maintaining peak performance. We are all
performers in one way or another and it is particularly valuable to use
such techniques of athletes and public figures for our own
enhancement. If you want to become more enthusiastic, repeat “I am
more enthusiastic today and am improving this trait daily”. Repeat it
over and over. Purchase a legal notepad and write out this mantra 500
times. Do it for three weeks with regular practice and feel that this
quality is developing. Very soon it will come. This is a strategy that
Indian sages have employed for thousands of years to aid their spiritual
and mental development. Do not be discouraged if the results are not
immediate, they will certainly develop. The spoken word is a powerful
influencer of the mind.
30. Maintain a diary to measure your progress and to express your
thoughts. Writing out not only your successes but your troubles is one
of the world’s most effective methods of erasing the worry habit,
staying in optimum state and developing precision of thought.
31. Stress is simply a response which you create in the interpretation
of an event. Two people might find that a given event results in quite
different responses. For example, an after dinner speech might strike
fear into the heart of an inexperienced speaker while a strong orator
views it as a wonderful opportunity to share his thoughts.
Understanding that the perceived negative effects of an event or task
may be mentally manipulated and conditioned towards the positive,
will allow you to be a peak performer in all instances.
32. Read “The Seven Habits of Highly Effective People” by Stephen
Covey. It contains a wealth of wisdom and powerful insights into
further developing your character and enhancing your personal
relationships.
97
98 MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
33. Become a committed audio-tape user. Most self-mastery
programs and books are now offered in this format. Listen to these
inspirational materials on your way to work, whilst waiting in the line
at a bank or while you wash dishes in the evening. Make your car a
college on wheels and use the drive time to make knowledge your best
friend. All down time can be very effectively used in this productive
fashion. Use such opportunities to learn and continually expand your
mind and its vast potential.
34. Try fasting one day every two weeks. During these fast days, drink
fruit juice and eat fresh fruits only. You will feel more energetic,
cleansed and alert. Fasting also has a salutary effect on your will-power
as you are subverting the otherwise pressing impulses in your mind
calling on you to eat more.
35. Keep a radio-cassette player at your office and listen to soft,
soothing music throughout the day. Place pleasant scents and
inspirational pictures in your workplace. By the magic of association,
your work will become something you enjoy even more and arouse a
very pleasant feeling within you.
35. Budget your time on trips such that you can spend half an hour
in the airport bookstore. They always contain the latest and best selfmastery
books and tapes given that those who travel by air are of a
group that finds value in these materials.
36. Read “As a Man Thinketh” by James Allen. And don’t just read
this little book once, read it over and over again. It contains an
abundance of timeless wisdom on living a fuller and happier life.
37. Remember that forgiveness is a virtue that few develop, but one
that is most important to maintaining peace of mind. Mark Twain
wrote that forgiveness is the fragrance the violet sheds on the heel that
has crushed it. Practice forgiveness especially in those situations where
it is seemingly difficult. By using your emotional forgiveness muscles
more regularly, petty wrongs, remarks and slights will not touch you
and nothing will penetrate your concentrated, serene mindset.
38. Empty your cup. A full cup cannot accept anything more.
Similarly, a person who believes that he cannot learn anything else
will stagnate quickly and not move to higher levels. A true sign of a
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life 99
secure, mature individual is someone who sees every opportunity as a
chance to learn. Even the teachers have teachers.
39. The Two Minute Mind is an excellent exercise for developing
concentration. Simply stare at the second hand on your wristwatch for
two minutes and think about nothing else for that time. At first your
mind will wander but after 21 days of practice, your attention will not
waver during the routine. One of the greatest qualities a person can
develop to ensure his success is the ability to focus for extended periods
of time. Learn to build up your concentration muscles and no task will
be too difficult for you.
40. Drink a cup of warm water before a speech. Ronald Reagan
employed this strategy to ensure that he maintained his honey-smooth
voice. Mastery of the art of public speaking is a noble goal. So dedicate
yourself to it. You will be judged by the calibre of your communication
skills.
41. When you stand and meet someone, stand firm and steadfast. A
telling sign of an unfocused, weak mind is constant fidgeting, shifting
of the eyes and shallow breathing.
42. Act tough and you will be tough. Have courage and inspire
others with your actions. But always be considerate.
43. Ask not what this world can do for you but, rather, what you can
do for this world. Make service an important goal in your life. It is a
most fulfilling investment of time. Remember, in the twilight of your
life, when all is said and done, the quality of your life boils down to the
quality of your contribution to others. Leave a rich legacy for those
around you to savour.
44. Once a week, arise at dawn. It is a magical time of day. Be still,
go for a walk or simply listen to an old Ella Fitzgerald recording. Take
a long, hot shower and do 100 pushups. Read one of the classics. You
will feel alive and invigorated.
45. Remain slightly aloof. Do not let everyone know everything
about you. Cultivate a mystique.
46. Master the art of public speaking. There are few natural speakers.
One great trial lawyer stammered dreadfully but through courage and
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
strength of conviction, he developed into a brilliant orator. Role
model anyone you think is a highly effective, influential
communicator. Visualize a picture of this person. Stand like him, smile
like him, and talk like him. The results will startle you.
47. Seek out motivational speakers committed to character training
and lifelong success. Make it a point to attend inspirational lectures
each month to consistently renew the importance of personal growth
in your mind. In a two hour seminar, you can learn powerful
techniques and strategies that others have spent many years learning
and refining. Never feel that you have no time for gathering new ideas,
you are investing in yourself.
48. Read the wonderful book “Discovering Happiness” by Dennis
Wholey. It will certainly open up new horizons for you in your quest
for an optimal state of health and happiness.
49. To enhance your concentration, read a passage in a book you
have never explored. Then try to recite it verbatim. Practice this for
only 5 minutes a day and enjoy the results which follow after a few
months of effort.
50. Try entering a 5 km running race and then a 10 km event. The
adrenaline that flows from the experience of racing with several
hundred other fitness-minded people is exhilarating. By constantly
pushing the envelope of your capacity, your potential will quickly
unfold. Remember, the body will give you only what you ask of it.
51. Aromas have been proven to be an effective means of entering a
state of relaxation. Scents have a very noticeable effect on your
mindset and moods. Purchase the essential oils of orange and clove
bud from your local health food shop. Put a few drops of either oil
within a cup of boiling water and inhale the sweet smelling steam for
a few minutes. Then let the mixture sit in the room where you are
resting. You will gain a sense of peace and serenity. A little apple spice
in the air has recently been shown to induce a far more restful sleep.
52. Cultivate the art of walking half an hour after you have finished
eating your evening meal. Walks in natural settings are the very best.
Walking is, perhaps, nature’s ideal exercise. And when you walk, do
not think about work or about the bills or about the challenges you
100
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
might be facing - this will neutralize many of the benefits. Simply
enjoy the walk. Notice the richness of your surroundings. Let your
senses drink in the beauty of nature and the crispness of the air for a
change. So many people who have mastered the art of growing
younger have also mastered the habit of a daily walk.
53. Start a program of weight lifting at the gym. Strong people are
mentally tough people. As you age, you need not lose your physical nor
your mental strength. 75 year-old men are running marathons, 80 yearold
women have scaled mountains and 90 year-old grandparents are
living rich, productive lives. Whether you are 19 or 93, stay fit, stay
motivated and stay passionate about life.
54. Never argue with the person you work for - you will lose more
than just the argument.
55. In terms of business attire, dark suits (navy blue and charcoal
grey) reflect power, sophistication and authority. Have you ever seen a
prime minister or president in a tan suit?
56. Regularly send handwritten notes to your business clients and
your other relations to strengthen the bond. Develop a system which
reminds you to send something valuable to this network at least once
every four months. Send them postcards when you are away on
vacation. If you have to buy a few hundred postcards and spend an
hour writing, don’t worry. This is an exceptionally good investment of
your time. Another idea is to send a recent article of interest to your
contacts with a handwritten note saying that you thought this would
interest them and that you continue to value their friendship.
Relationship building should always be a central focus whether you are
a CEO, a student, a salesperson or a parent.
57. Two of the fundamentals for a happy, joyful life are balance and
moderation. One must maintain a balance of all activities and do
nothing to extremes.
58. Drink Jasmine tea which can be obtained from any Chinese
herbal shop. It is excellent for your general health and is very relaxing.
Also try placing a few slices of fresh ginger in a cup of hot water for a
superb tea that will restore vitality and keep you in a peak physical
condition.
101
102 MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
59. Remember that effective time management makes you more
rather than less flexible. It allows you to do the things that you really
want to do rather than the things you really have to do.
60. Do not take personal development books as gospel. Read them
and take whatever useful ideas you need. Some people feel they must
do everything suggested and take the techniques to extremes. Every
book has at least one tool or strategy of benefit. Take what you need
and what works for you and discard what doesn’t suit you.
61. Become an adventurer. Revitalize your spirit and sense of
playfulness. Become a kid again. Once every few months, plan to enjoy
a new, thrilling activity such as white water rafting, scuba diving,
windsurfing, rockclimbing, joining a martial arts club, sailing, deep sea
fishing or camping. This will keep your life in perspective, bring you
closer to those you share the activity with and keep you feeling
invigorated and young.
62. Spend time with Nature. Natural settings have a powerful effect
on your senses which in turn will lead to a sense of renewal,
refreshment and peacefulness. Peak performers through the ages have
understood the importance of getting back to Nature. Start camping
or simply taking quiet walks in the forest. Rest by a sparkling stream.
Cultivate your own little garden which will serve as your personal oasis
in the middle of a crowded city. By cultivating a friendship with
Nature, you will quickly find more serenity, contentment and richness
in your life.
63. Recall the wise saying “mens sana in corpore sano” which means
in a sound body rests a sound mind. Never neglect the body which is
intimately connected to the mind. This is your temple. Feed it the
finest fuels, exercise daily and care for it as you would your prized
possession - because it is.
64. Be so strong that nothing interferes with your peace of mind. A
well-known boxer was once unhappy. When asked why, he said that
he had allowed himself to think a negative thought. Curb your desires
and stay centered and focused - it gets easier with practice. You truly
cannot afford the luxury of even one negative thought.
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
65. Do not eat three hours before sleep. This allows for smoother
digestion and a more restful sleep. For deeper, more renewing sleep,
remember that a daily dose of exercise promotes good sleep as does a
period of relaxation an hour before bed. Also do not bring work to bed
with you or think about anything which might agitate you. Ease
yourself into sleep like a baby being sung a soft, soothing lullaby. And
finally, as Leonardo da Vinci said: “a well-spent day brings happy
sleep.”
66. Be careful about your reputation. If it is good it will take you to
the highest of heights. But once tarnished, it will be difficult to
retrieve. Always reflect on your course of action. Never do anything
you wouldn’t be proud to tell your mother about. Have fun always but
temper it with common sense and prudence.
67. Find mentors to model who will guide you in your progress. The
mistakes of the world have all been made once before - why shouldn’t
you have the benefit of the experience of others? Find someone who
has both courage and consideration for others, someone who is
therefore mature. Your mentor must have only your best interests in
mind and should be sufficiently senior to offer you good guidance on
the subjects you seek assistance with. Everyone needs to feel
appreciated and even the busiest of executives will find time to assist
a person who respects them and values their advice.
68. Make a list of all your weaknesses. A truly confident and
enlightened person will note a weakness and seek to methodically
improve. Bear in mind that even the greatest and most powerful
people have weaknesses. Some are better than others in hiding them.
On the other hand, get to know your best qualities and cultivate them.
69. Never complain. Be known as a positive, strong, energetic and
enthusiastic person. Someone who complains, is cynical and always
looks for the negative in everything, will scare people away and rarely
will succeed at anything. From a purely psychological viewpoint,
things are always created twice: once in the mind and then in reality.
Focus on the positive. Be so mentally tough that nothing takes you off
your planned course to success. Visualize and firmly believe in what
you want. It will most certainly come true.
103
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
70. Overlook the weaknesses of your friends. If you look for flaws you
will most surely find them. Be mature enough to ignore the petty
failings of others and see the good that each one inherently possesses.
We can learn from everyone. Everyone has a story to tell, a joke to
share and a lesson to learn. Open your mind to this and you will learn
a tremendous amount. Friends are so very important to a happy
existence - especially those who have shared many experiences and
laughs with you. Work hard to make friendships, and all your
relationships for that matter, stronger and richer. Call your friends, buy
them small gifts of books or other items you believe they might enjoy.
The “law of the farm” applies to relationships as well as to the rest of
life - you reap what you sow and to have great friends you must first be
one.
71. Be kind, considerate and courteous. But also be shrewd and know
when to be tough and courageous. This is the mark of a well-defined
character and you will surely command respect. It is most useful to read
books on friendliness and enhancing relationships by being a good
listener, showing others sincere appreciation and refining other interpersonal
skills. But, to truly succeed, one must also recognize that
worldly wisdom and shrewdness are essential skills to foster. Become an
expert in human psychology and be able to read the essence of people.
Never be taken advantage of and be aware of the politics around you.
Stay above petty gossiping and office politics but appreciate that they
indeed exist and know what goes on behind your back. Every great
leader does.
72. Create your image as a highly competent, strong, disciplined,
calm and decent individual. Find that crucial balance between
working on the image that you project to the rest of the world and your
inner character. Create a sense of mystery about yourself as the truly
wise never show their hand. Do not tell everyone everything about
yourself, your strategies and your aspirations. The successful citizens of
this world think thrice before they speak because a word uttered can
never be retrieved. Make things look easy and people will say you are
naturally gifted. Speak only good things and people will flock to you.
Never speak ill of others and all will know you will not malign them
behind their backs. Build your character and live a highly principled
life.
104
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
73. Familiarity breeds contempt is a very good rule. The stars remain
far above the Earth. You must keep a distance from all but your closest
of relations. Once people see everything of a leader he loses his aura
and with it the authority and mystique he may have created. For
example, Ronald Reagan was known to many as an excellent leader.
He carefully cultivated his image of a folksy, considerate politician who
kept the interests of the United States first and foremost in his mind.
At gatherings of world leaders, he commanded attention and respect
in his dark suits, surrounded by the trappings of power such as political
aides, security officers and a convoy of limousines. As soon as he
appeared, thoughts of authority and power came to our minds. Did you
ever see the President with his shirt off swimming at his pool? How
about in his dressing gown after waking up after one of his long sleeps,
hair tousled and beard grown? Reagan’s handlers never allowed such
glimpses because they detract from the perception of authority. The
American nation was not exposed to these sights. In the Clinton Era
things changed and you saw the President eating Big Macs and
wearing baseball caps with a full business suit. Whilst these scenes may
be endearing to the public, there is little doubt that President Clinton
was more familiar to us, merely another one of us and, unlike the stars
above, much closer to the ground.
74. Learn to organize your time. It is incorrect to say that by
becoming a meticulous time manager and living by a carefully defined
schedule you become rigid and non-spontaneous. Rather, proper
organization allows one to accomplish those goals which are truly
important as well as enjoy leisure time. Good time management offers
more time for fun and relaxation - not less. These important periods
are scheduled into the week just like other commitments which may
appear more pressing. Neither are sacrificed. Also, discipline yourself
and stop wasting time on all those immediate and pressing but
unimportant tasks (i.e., the ringing phones) and concentrate on the
activities that are truly meaningful to your life’s mission. Such
activities include time for self-renewal and reflection, time forging
relationships built on trust and mutual respect, time for physical
fitness, time to read and think deeply and time serving others in your
community.
105
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
75. Keep well-informed about current events, the latest books and
popular trends. Many peak performers read five or six papers a day. You
don’t have to read every story of every paper. Know what to focus on,
what to pass by and what to clip out and read at another time (many
successful people scan scores of magazines and papers, clipping out
articles of interest; these articles go into a file folder which can be read
in your down time). Knowledge is power. Whether you are an
entrepreneur, a corporate leader or someone leading a family, you can
profoundly change your life and the lives of those around you with a
single idea. Just ask Gates, Edison and Bell.
76. When choosing your life partner, remember that this is the most
important decision of your lifetime. The marriage relationship offers
90% of all your support, happiness and fulfillment so choose it wisely.
Consider qualities such as affection, sense of humor, intelligence,
integrity, maturity, temperament, compatibility and that indescribable
characteristic of chemistry. If these are present, your relationship
stands an excellent chance of great success. Move slowly and let no
one press you into an uncomfortable decision.
77. Never discuss your personal development activities with anyone.
Your strategies for expanding your mind and spirit are your own.
Others might not understand the value of self-mastery and, further,
will take away your credit when you meet with success by saying that
you relied on techniques. Keep these self-development activities to
yourself.
78. Schedule relaxation time into your week and be ruthless in
protecting it. You would not schedule another activity into the time
planned for an important meeting with the president of your company
or your best client so why would you put off a period to invest in
yourself? We must have time for ourselves to reflect, unwind and
recharge our batteries. These are the renewal activities that allow us to
maintain peak performance and are exceptionally valuable periods.
79. 83% of our sensory input comes from our eyes. To truly
concentrate on something, shut your eyes and you will remove much
distraction.
80. Be the master of your will but the servant of your conscience.
106
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
81. Develop the wonderful habit of a daily swim. It will promote
excellent health, keep you relaxed and concentrated, lean and trim.
Swimming is not stressful on the body, provides a great workout for the
lungs and requires little time to do effectively. Remember that in a fit
body resides a fit mind.
82. People who are doing good today are ensuring their happiness for
tomorrow.
83. The key to successful time management is doing what you
planned to do when you planned to do it. Keep your mind fully on the
task at hand. Only then will you achieve all your goals and have time
for the things that matter most. Although it is imperative to be flexible
(a bow too tightly strung will soon break), following your planned
schedule requires no more than simple discipline.
84. An excellent visualization technique: if you are worrying about
something, picture the words of your worry on a piece of paper. Now
ignite a match to the paper and watch the worry dissipate into flames.
Bruce Lee, the great martial arts master employed this mental control
device regularly.
85. Compartmentalize your worry. Set aside a certain amount of time
to ponder over a problem and map out an effective plan of attack and
your options. Once this is done, have the mental fortitude not to come
back to the problem and go over it again and again. The human mind
is a strange creature - things we want to forget keep coming back and
those things we want to remember are not there when we want them.
But the mind is similar to a muscle and the more you flex it the
stronger it will become. Make it your servant. Feed it only the best
nutrition and information. It will serve you well and perform magic if
you believe in it.
86. Peak performers are physically relaxed and mentally engaged.
87. To be at your performance peak mentally, your body must be
loose physically and relaxed. It is now beyond dispute that there is a
mind-body connection and when the body is supple, free from tension,
the mind is clear, calm and focused as well. This is why yoga is such a
beneficial activity. It keeps the body relaxed so that the mind can
follow. Basic stretching for 15 minutes a day is also an excellent way to
107
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
release tension that builds up as a result of our life in this highly
complex and fast moving, but wonderful world. Try having a massage
or power lounging in a Jacuzzi. Relax the body and you relax the mind.
88. Prepare a detailed financial plan for the next few years and follow
it. Seek out financial advice if you need it. A powerful strategy for
financial mastery is also a simple one: save 10% of all you make for
long-term growth (take this off the pay cheque before you have a
chance to spend it). If you can invest $200 a month for the next 30
years at an annual return rate of 15%, you will end up with $1.4
million dollars. Being wise with your money is one of the very best
investments to make. Financial security leads to personal freedom.
89. Readers are leaders. U.S. President Bill Clinton read more than
300 books during his short time at Oxford University. Some top
performers read a book a day. Seek out knowledge and information.
We have truly entered the age of massive information and those who
are proactive can use this to their advantage. The more you know, the
less you fear.
90. Get into the excellent habit of reading something positive and
inspirational before you go to bed and as soon as you awake in the
morning. You will soon note the benefits as these thoughts will be
supporting you throughout the day.
91. Make it one of your goals to develop a dynamic, charismatic
personality. Such a quality is something each one of us has the
potential to develop but few do. President Kennedy was a sickly youth
but rose above his physical problems to be the most charismatic and
exciting political figure in the history of the United States. Start off
small. Take a Dale Carnegie course on public speaking. Go to the
library where you will find books on the fine art of conversation and
personal grooming. Learn three clean and witty jokes and get in the
habit of socializing. You will have fun and build a lasting network of
friends and associates.
92. On the subject of conversation, a Chinese proverb states as
follows: “a single conversation across the table with a wise man is
worth a month’s study of books.” Seek out the wise and learn from
them. They are just waiting for that small spark of interest to tell you
all that you need to know.
108
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
93. Lao-Tzu prized three essential qualities for a person of greatness:
“the first is gentleness; the second is frugality; the third is humility,
which keeps me from putting myself before others. Be gentle and you
can be bold; be frugal and you can be liberal; avoid putting yourself
before others and you can become a leader among men.”
94. “When you cannot make up your mind which of two evenly
balanced courses of action you should take - choose the bolder,” said
W. J. Slim. There is no substitute for courage and though the chance
of stubbing your toe increases the more you walk, it is always better
than going nowhere by standing still. Take chances, take smart risks
and you will meet with success beyond your dreams.
95. Become your spouse’s number one supporter, the one who is
always there supporting and fueling hopes and dreams. Develop
together and march confidently through the world as an army of two.
96. Think of three people who can provide you with inspiration,
motivation and support for your goals and aspirations. Plan to meet
with each one of them over the next few weeks. Listen enthusiastically
to them and brainstorm with them. Map out a strategy and take their
wise counsel.
97. Make every one of your days a true masterpiece. Remember the
old saying: “it’s not who you think you are that holds you back but
what you think you’re not.”
98. Just as valuable energy is wasted by spending time on activities
that are of no value, energy can be wasted on loose thinking. Imagine
that your mind has an energy measure of 1000 watts at its disposal.
Each time your mind wanders off the project at hand, to a nagging
worry, to all the things to do by the end of the day, 100 watts is lost.
Quite soon the entire energy supply is gone. This is the nature of the
mind. Fail to discipline it and your energy levels will be depleted and
your accomplishments will be minimal. Control it and you will see
great things happening. You will feel more powerful and achieve
difficult tasks with ease. The 19th century philosopher Henri Frederic
Amiel summed it up nicely: “for purposes of action, nothing is more
useful than narrowness of thought combined with energy of will.”
99. It has been rightly said that “you sow an action, you reap a habit.
109
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
You sow a habit, you reap a character. You sow a character, you reap a
destiny.” The essence of a person is his character - make yours unique,
unblemished and strong. Do not say you will do anything unless you
will indeed do it. Speak the truth and measure your words wisely. Be
humble, straightforward and peaceful.
100. Remember the overriding law of nature: positive overcomes the
negative.
101. A contented mind is a continual feast. Greed and material
desires must be curbed to achieve lasting happiness and serenity. Be
happy with what you have. Do you really need all of those material
possessions? One can develop contentment just as one develops
patience, courage and concentration - with daily practice and sincere
desire.
102. Make a new friend or acquaintance every day. Keep an updated
list of all contacts close at hand. Rich relationships are the DNA of a
rich, rewarding life.
103. Remember this ancient Indian proverb: “if you conquer your
mind, you conquer the world.”
104. Place greater importance on staying happy than amassing
material possessions. A zest for life is developed and carefully nurtured
through thoughtful activities and pursuits.
105. Contrary to popular opinion, stress is not a bad thing. It allows
us to perform at peak levels and can assist us through the flood of
chemicals it releases within our bodies. What is harmful is too much
stress, or more particularly, a lack of relief from stress. The times of
stress must be balanced nicely with times of pure relaxation and leisure
for us to be healthy and at our best. Many of the great leaders of our
time were exposed to crushing workloads and the burdens of high
office. But they prospered by developing strategies to balance the
challenging times with fun and calming times. President Kennedy
would have regular naps in his White House office. Winston Churchill
had the same practice and slept for one hour every afternoon to stay
alert, focused and calm. Not only is it essential to be physically relaxed
to maintain optimal health but one must couple this trait with mental
serenity. Too often people think that vigorous exercise, good nutrition
110
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
and pleasant leisure activities will be the panacea for all ills. These
pursuits must be combined with positive thinking and peace of mind
for true happiness and longevity.
106. Get into the habit of taking mental vacations throughout the
day. Visit Bermuda for five minutes in the morning. Visualize a swim
in the Mediterranean in the afternoon and skiing down the slopes of
the Alps just before you head for home at the end of your busy and
productive day. Try this for two months and schedule these rest periods
into your agenda just as you would your essential meetings or tasks.
The rewards will be significant.
107. A change is as good as a rest. Whether this change is as major as
a change of employment or as minor as a leisure pursuit which
occupies your entire attention for an hour three times a week, these
changes in routine, and mindset are entirely beneficial. In selecting
the activity, try to find something totally engaging which requires deep
concentration so that your mind is free from the mundane but
seemingly important aspects of your day. Many executives are
becoming involved in the martial arts for just this reason. If your mind
wanders for even a split second, a harsh lesson is soon learned. Pain is
a great motivator and always will be.
108. Study these 10 fundamentals of happiness:
• Pursue a productive, exciting and active life
• Engage in meaningful activities every minute of every day
• Develop an organized, planned lifestyle with little chaos
• Set realistic goals yet keep your mark high
• Think positively - you cannot afford the luxury of a negative
thought
• Avoid needless worry over trifling matters
• Devote time to fun
• Develop a warm, outgoing personality with a sincere love of
people
• Get in the habit of giving more than receiving
• Learn to live in the present. The past is water under the bridge
of life.
109. Strive to be humble and live a simple life.
111
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
110. Read “A History of Knowledge” by Charles Van Doren which
chronicles the history of the world’s ideas. In this one book is an
absolute wealth of knowledge. Get it, read it and enjoy it.
111. Read “The Art of the Leader” by William A. Cohen. It is both
inspirational and practical.
112. Develop that elusive quality known as charisma. The following
are ten qualities of a charismatic leader:
1. Be committed to what you are doing
2. Look like a winner and act like one
3. Have big dreams, a vision and reach for the sky
4. Steadily advance in the direction of your goals
5. Prepare and work hard at every task you do
6. Build a mystique around yourself
7. Be interested in others and show kindness
8. Have a strong sense of humour
9. Be known for the strength of your character
10. Have grace under pressure. (John F. Kennedy said that “the
elusive half-step between middle management and true
leadership is grace under pressure.”)
113. In work, love and life, play hard and play fair.
114. Do not talk when you are listening. Interrupting is one of the
most common discourtesies. Listen aggressively with the full scope of
your attention. You will be amazed at what you learn and how your
counsel will soon be sought by many.
115. “Anybody can become angry - that is easy; but to be angry with
the right person, and to the right degree, and at the right time, and for
the right purpose, and in the right way - that is not within everybody’s
power and is not easy.” - Aristotle
116. Knowledge is power. People who have achieved great success are
not necessarily more skillful or intelligent than others. What separates
them is their burning desire and thirst for knowledge. The more one
knows, the more one achieves. Great leaders have techniques to allow
them to arrive at the top of the mountain. Read the biographies of the
world’s leaders and learn from their habits, inspirations and
philosophies. Cultivate the important practice of active role
modelling.
112
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
117. All the answers to any questions are in print. How to improve as
a public speaker, how to improve your relations with others, how to
become fitter or develop a better memory - all aspects of personal
development are dealt with in books. Therefore, in order to achieve
your maximum potential, you must read daily. But, in this age of
information, you must be ruthless in what you consume. Focus on your
goals and read only those materials that will be an asset to you. Do not
attempt to read everything for you are busy and have other tasks at
hand. Choose what is important and filter out what is of no value.
Begin with a solid newspaper every morning for an excellent summary
of the key events of the day. Also ensure that your readings are broadly
based. For example, perhaps you may wish to read history, business,
Eastern philosophy, health books etc. Then go to the library and
develop the habit of making regular visits. Read the classics from
Hemingway to Bram Stoker. Read history, with all its lessons on life
and read biology for a new perspective. Look under the heading of
“success” at the library and you will be amazed at the literature you will
find: inspirational stories of people who developed greatness in the
face of adversity, strategies for improving yourself physically, mentally
and spiritually and texts to tap the unlimited power for success that
certainly exists within us. Drink deeply from such books. Surround
yourself with them and read them constantly whether on the bus each
day or before you go to bed. Let them inspire and motivate you.
118. Get into the habit of breakfast meetings. An early meal to touch
base with a friend or business associate is a most pleasant way to start
the day and allows you to maintain your contacts in the face of a busy
schedule.
119. If you live in a flat, always ensure that it is very bright and has a
swimming pool. A pool is especially important because it will allow
you to exercise no matter how busy your schedule. There is nothing
like a refreshing swim after a long, productive day. You will feel
excellent and sleep like a baby.
120. “Excellence is an art won by training and habituation. We do not
act rightly because we have virtue or excellence, but rather we have
those because we have acted rightly. We are what we repeatedly do.
Excellence, then, is not an act but a habit.” - Aristotle
113
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
121. “Today is yesterday’s pupil.” - Benjamin Franklin
122. If you have a choice of taking two paths, always take the more
daring of the two. Calculated risk taking often produces extraordinary
results.
123. Every day, get away from the noise, the crowds and the rush and
spend a few hours alone in peaceful introspection, deep reading or
simple relaxation.
124. That which any person who has walked this Earth has achieved
you can achieve with the right mental attitude, perseverance and
industry. Limiting thoughts and weak mental images must be banished.
One’s focus must be on the attainment of goals that are truly
important.
125. Get into the habit of memorizing beautiful poetry. Not only will
it be a great source of entertainment but it will quickly lift your
intellectual functions to a higher level by improving your memory,
concentration and mental agility.
126. Keep your words soft and arguments hard.
127. Break the worry habit by putting things in perspective and
laughing over small setbacks. Repeat to yourself that “this will soon
pass”. Then take a sheet of paper, write out the worry on your mind.
Allot a certain period of time to think on it, isolate the precise
problem and formulate a powerful line of attack. By this practical
technique, your negative, energy sapping habit will soon be a faint
memory of the past.
128. Be known as that person who goes the extra mile. The person
who works longer than others. The one who takes on the extra
assignments and follows them through with great success. Be the
person who always has concerns about others and who makes family
members feel truly special. Be a standout, the one with a balance in
both personal and professional excellence. Be a star that shines
brightly for all others to admire.
129. Become a committed and sincere networker. Cultivate new
friendships. You will truly be surprised where people end up over the
years and how small, kind gestures will help you later on in life. Treat
114
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
everyone who crosses your path as if they are the most important
person in your world. You will certainly meet with great success.
130. When you look for something you will find it. If you constantly
expect exceptional success, you will surely have it. Peak performers
attract success. You must keep the goals you desire to achieve at the
forefront of your mind throughout the day. Repeat your ambitions at
least five times a day and visualize yourself achieving them. If your goal
is to be rich, picture the house you will be living in, the car you will be
driving, what it will feel like to be rich and the pleasure of attaining
your goals in life. Repeat your ambition over and over until you have
complete certainty that you will attain your desires and eventually you
will.
131. Develop a sense of wonder about the world. Be an explorer. Find
pleasure in the things that others take for granted. Stop and actually
listen to that wonderful street musician playing the trumpet. Read that
classic book your father loved so much. Plan to get away from the city
next week and visit a secluded, powerfully natural place for a few days.
Take a mini-retreat and care for your mind, body and spirit. It will
profoundly improve the quality of your life.
132. Send cards on birthdays and little notes from time to time
showing that you care and were thinking about your relations. We are
all busy but if you spend just five minutes a week to send a card to a
friend or family member, by the year end you will have sent out 52
cards. This is a small investment for the dividends that are guaranteed
to follow.
133. Remember and use people’s names when you talk to them. A
person’s name is a uniquely sweet sound to them.
134. Go outdoors and look up into the blue sky for half an hour. Note
the supremely strong feeling that you get when you are connected to
Nature. Get away from your rigid schedule today and spend the
afternoon in a beautiful setting. Walk in the woods and sit by a cool
stream. Go fishing or rent a canoe. Getting away from your routine will
provide a refreshing release and make you feel wonderful when you
eventually return.
135. Once every few weeks, leave your watch at home. In this society
we often become bound to the clock and soon it governs our every
115
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
action like a rigid taskmaster. Go through the day doing precisely what
you wish to do and for however long you wish to do it. Spend time
with that special person without having to run off to your next
appointment. Savour the moments and focus on what is truly
important rather than those mundane things that somehow take on a
greater importance than they really deserve. Lose the clock and gain
some quality time.
136. Laugh at work and be known as a positive achiever.
137. An idea gives rise to a mental image. A mental image will then
generate a mental habit out of which a mental trait ultimately
blossoms. Master your thoughts and you master your mind; master your
mind and you master your life; master your life and you master your
destiny.
138. Recognize the tremendous power of opposition thinking. This
simple technique simply involves the substitution of a positive thought
each and every time a negative or limiting thought enters your mind
and begins to detract from your focus. For example, on a Sunday
evening, you may think “I wish I did not have to return to work
tomorrow after such a pleasant and relaxing weekend.” Immediately
replace this defeating thought pattern before it begins to take hold by
thinking the opposite. For example you might think “I cannot wait to
return to the office given the exciting projects on the go and the
wonderful sense of accomplishment I receive after a productive,
challenging week.” Then think how fortunate you are to have a job
and one that you can advance in through your own efforts and
productivity. Make a list of all of the positive attributes of your position
and repeat them over and over. Soon the negative pattern will be
broken and you will look toward the exciting week ahead with that
most fabulous of qualities: enthusiasm.
139. Get deep into the habit of personal introspection. Ben Franklin
called this one of the most important strategies for personal
effectiveness. Spend ten minutes every night before you go to bed in
self-examination. Think about the good things you did during the day
and the bad actions you may have taken which you must change in
order to excel and grow. Successful people are simply more thoughtful
than others. Daily reflection will soon allow for the eradication of your
116
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
negative qualities (ranging from procrastination to gossiping to
insulting others) and will sharpen the mind. After steady practice, a
time will eventually arrive when the mistakes you make are few indeed
and your personal power will move to the highest level.
140. The most efficient and effective alarm clock ever developed lies
within our own minds. If you do not believe this, try the following:
1. Sit in an easy chair approximately ten minutes before you go
to bed.
2. Shut your eyes and gently rest your hands on your knees.
3. Breathe deeply for a few minutes (inhale to the count of
five, hold to the count of ten and exhale fully).
4. Repeat the following command to yourself at least twenty
times: “I will awake at (the desired time) feeling fresh, alert
and enthusiastic.” This command must be said with feeling
and emotion. Then take a few seconds to visualize yourself
waking up at the desired time (the more detailed the mental
picture the better) and imagine how great you will feel. You
will soon wake up at the desired moment after little or no
practice.
141. Some men see things as they are and say “why?” I dream of things
that never were and say “why not?” George Bernard Shaw
142. Use these strategies to improve the quality of your mind-calming
meditation:
1. Practice meditation at the same time each day and in the
same place so that your mind becomes accustomed to entering
the desired serene state as soon as you enter the peaceful place.
2. The early morning is undoubtedly the most powerful time to
meditate. Indian yogis believe that the pre-dawn time has
almost magical qualities which aid in achieving the superpeaceful
state so many meditators attempt to attain.
3. Before you start, command your mind to be quiet by using
affirmations such as “I will be focused and very calm now.”
4. If thoughts do enter, do not force them out but simply let
them pass like clouds making way for the beautiful blue sky.
Picture that your mind is like a still lake without even a ripple.
117
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
5. Sit for ten minutes at first and then increase the time every
few sittings. After a month or two, you will not be interrupted
by any pressing thoughts and will surely feel a sense of peace
that you have never felt before.
143. Forge and foster great friendships as such relationships are
essential for maintaining a healthy and successful life. Find a few
minutes every day to jot down some warm wishes to an old friend or to
place a telephone call to someone you have not had a chance to speak
to for a while. Show compassion and sincere consideration for all your
friends and watch the results which follow. Develop long lasting
friendships by being a good friend. Also, make it a priority to seek out
new friends no matter how many you may be fortunate enough to
have. This is one of life’s greatest joys which many of us miss.
144. Purchase a cassette or CD of Miles Davis’s Kind Of Blue. It is a
uniquely soothing compilation that will refresh and soothe you after a
challenging and productive day. Music such as this is good for the soul.
145. Drown your appetite by drinking more water - ten glasses a day
is ideal. It revitalizes the system and purifies the body. Also, get into
the habit of eating soups and more complex carbohydrates such as rice,
potatoes and pasta which feed your hunger with far less calories than
other less healthy foods. You truly are what you eat and must ensure
that your diet is designed to maximize your energy and mental clarity.
146. Develop the essential habit of punctuality for it is most
important for high success. Punctuality reflects discipline and a proper
regard for others. Without it, even the most sophisticated person
appears slightly offensive. Do not be early and certainly never be late.
Budget your time and, should you arrive early, take a walk or simply
relax for a few moments to ensure that you arrive on time as requested.
You will be appreciated and welcomed always if you cultivate this
important quality that appears so rarely these days.
147. The telephone is there for your convenience, not for the
convenience of others who are attempting to contact you. If you are
busy with a task, do not answer the phone or have someone answer the
call so that you may return it at a more suitable time. Do not let such
interruptions waste your time. Most phone calls are not important and
118
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
last far too long anyway. Over the course of the average American’s
lifetime, she will spend two years unsuccessfully returning phone calls.
There are so many important and fun things to do in life. The
challenge is to respect precious time so that we can achieve a fuller,
more satisfying life.
148. Start your day off well. Before you get out of bed each morning,
say a prayer or repeat your personal affirmation giving thanks for the
day and all the positive things you will see and achieve. Make a
conscious decision to make this the best day of your life and meet with
pleasure, success and fun. If you believe it, it will most certainly
happen. A timeless secret for lifelong success is to live each day as if it
were your last.
149. Confide in your partner. This will strengthen the relationship
and allow you both to grow at the same pace. It is also a wonderful
tonic to share important or otherwise troubling things with the person
you are closest to.
150. Push yourself just a little harder and a little farther each day.
Winners on the playing field of life push the envelope of their
potential daily. Do the thing you fear and the death of fear is certain.
Winners do the things that less developed people don’t like doing even
though they also might not enjoy doing them. This is what strength of
character and courage is all about. Tackle your weaknesses. Do the
thing that you have consistently put off. Write that thank you note or
letter that you have neglected for so long. Exercise your discipline
muscles and they will rise to the occasion by filling your day with more
satisfaction, more effectiveness and far more energy.
151. All individuals who have attained the highest of levels generally
have cultivated the essential mental habit of optimism. Without
optimism, life loses its lustre and hardships appear at every step of the
way. This is an essential life habit.
152. Today, write down the seven best qualities of individuals who you
admire and post this list by your bed. Then, each morning as you rise,
focus on a new quality which you will strive to implement during the
day. After one week, you will notice small differences in yourself.
119
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
In one month, these traits will become firmly embedded. After two
months, all those important qualities will be yours.
153. You have as many reputations as you do acquaintances as each
person you know thinks differently of you. What should truly concern
you is your character. You have full control of this and this is what you
must develop, refine and cultivate. Once your character is strong and
vigorous, then all else that is positive will follow.
154. Consider yourself as an orange. Only what is really inside can
come out. If you fill your mind with thoughts of serenity, positivity,
strength, courage and compassion, when someone squeezes you, this is
the only juice that can flow.
155. Our lives have been described as a parenthesis in eternity. We are
but a small blip on the stage of the Universe. As we can take nothing
with us when we leave, then the real meaning of our existence must
be to give and serve others. Keep this in mind. When you wake up
early in the morning, repeat the mantra: “I will serve others today, I
will care for others today and I will be kind today.” This kind of living
will bring you huge returns if you stay on the purpose of aiding others
rather than on the outcome of personal gain.
156. Be known as an innovator at your place of work. Sit down over
the next week and write out ten suggestions for your supervisor as to
how to improve the work being done and the quality of the workplace
itself. Be known as an idea person willing to discover challenges and
tackle them with zest and enthusiasm.
157. Learn to laugh at yourself.
158. Keep open the windows of your mind.
159. Try to go through one full day without saying “I”. Focus on
others. Listen to others and you will learn wonderful new things as well
as gain friendships.
160. Spend one hour a day in full silence except in answer to direct
questions. Even then, answer directly and without extending the
conversation unduly. We, so very often, talk around subjects and
repeat ourselves. This ancient Eastern exercise will not only build your
will-power but develop clarity and precision of language which is
essential for effective communication.
120
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
161. Each day, do two things that you do not like doing. This may be
the preparation of a report you have been putting off or shining your
shoes. It does not matter how small the task, just do it! Soon these
chores will not seem so bad, your personal power will increase and your
productivity will soar. Try it because this is an age-old technique for
building strength of character.
162. True happiness comes from only one thing: achievement of goals,
whether they are personal, professional or otherwise. You are happiest
when you feel you are growing. When you feel that you are
contributing and advancing in the direction of your dreams, you will
notice that you have boundless energy and vitality. Time spent on
activities which offer little reward aside from a fleeting feeling of
relaxation (television watching is the best example), is time lost
forever. Relaxation is essential but chose the most effective means of
renewal and spend your time in productive pursuits that will slowly
move you along the path of accomplishment. Happiness comes from
doing - not sleeping.
163. Napoleon III of France had a special ability to remember the
names of all those he met. His secret was to say “so sorry, I missed your
name” after being introduced to a new person. This would cause the
name to be repeated and reinforced within his memory. If the name
was difficult, he would ask for the proper spelling.
164. The sages of China have held a basic life philosophy for
thousands of years: develop an indomitable spirit along with courtesy
and integrity. The repetition of these three traits will make you an
exceptionally powerful individual respected by all. Exert your effort
and personal influence to attain these qualities.
165. A valuable technique for defeating negative and self-limiting
thoughts that can hamper you from attaining peak performance is the
mental interrupt device. When a negative thought enters your
consciousness, first you must become aware of it and have a strong
desire to remove it for good. To do this, interrupt the negative train of
thought by doing something to break and banish the self-limiting
pattern. When the bad thought enters, you may pinch yourself and say,
“I am strong and weak thoughts are gone”, or you may shout out loud
or do anything that will divert your attention and remove the negative
121
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
focus. By practising this technique, you will see a marked decrease in
the negative thoughts that most people have, paving the way to the
mindset of a true winner.
166. Taking time from your busy work and family schedule to focus on
personal growth activities is essential and is never to be considered a
waste. Taking one hour from your hectic morning to watch kids
playing in a nearby park or to take a brisk walk might seem like a poor
use of time to some. But by making more time for life’s simple pleasures
and bringing more balance into your day, you will make the remaining
hours far more productive and effective. You cannot do good unless
you feel good. When you are serene, relaxed and enthusiastic you are
also more productive, creative and dynamic. This is something that
has been proved time and time again and yet we consistently get
caught up in the apparent immediacy of our routine and fail to see the
forest for the trees.
167. Read more, learn more, laugh more and love more.
168. Pick five relationships that you desire to improve over the next
six months. Write out the names of these people and under each name
detail why you want to improve the relationship, how you plan to do
so and in what time frame. This is simply another facet of goal setting
- the practice which will always yield excellent results in any of life’s
fields. Be committed to being a better parent, friend and citizen. Be
creative in the steps you take to show your appreciation and respect for
your loved ones. Sending notes is fine but consider unique and
thoughtful measures ranging from a romantic picnic in the country
with your partner to an early morning fishing trip with an old friend.
169. Remember the power of prayer.
170. An excellent investment in your personal growth is the six tape
series of Reverend Norman Vincent Peale entitled “The Power of
Positive Thinking”. Get it and listen to it over and over. It is packed
full of strategies and techniques that, without fail, will ensure that you
live a long, happy, productive and prosperous life.
171. Consider purchasing a pocket organizer which may prove to be
an excellent tool for scheduling, recording your commitments and
keeping the responsibilities of your life in fine order. One can be
purchased at a reasonable price.
122
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
172. Browse second-hand bookstores every few months searching for
lost treasures of character-building books. You will find gems on public
speaking, improving your habits, time management, personal health
and other important subjects for low prices. Some of these older texts
are the very best and come from an age where every young person was
under an obligation to develop discipline and good life habits regularly.
173. Read The Magic of Believing by Claude M. Bristol. It will allow
you to release the powerful forces which most certainly exist in your
mind but may presently be untapped.
174. Be known as someone with a cool head, warm heart and great
character. Your presence on this earth will long be remembered.
175. It has been said that doing something for others is the highest
form of religion. Every week, out of the 168 hours available, spend a
few in service to others. Many say that such selfless service soon
becomes a key focus within their lives. Give your time at a seniors
home or to needy children. Teach someone how to read or offer to give
a public lecture on the subject of your expertise. Simply take action
and do something to leave a legacy.
176. Fill your home with bright, fresh flowers. This is one of the best
investments you can make. Let the sounds of great music, loud
laughter and good fun fill the oasis of your home.
177. Get to know and enjoy your neighbors. They make life more
pleasant and can provide helpful resources when you least expect it.
178. Recognize the power of mantras and the repetition of positive,
powerful words. Indian yogis have employed this technique for over
4000 years to live tranquil, productive and focused lives. Create your
own personal mantra which you can repeat daily to enhance your
character and strengthen your spirit.
179. When the breath is still and strong, so is the mind.
180. Use the following visualization from time to time. Sit in a quiet
place and picture that you will be on the earth for only another day.
Who would you call, what would you say and what would you do?
These questions will give you some important insights into what
outstanding actions you must endeavor to complete.
123
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
181. Study the following evidence of high character:
1. Precision & clarity of thought and speech
2. Refined and gentle manners
3. The power and habit of introspection
4. The power of personal growth
5. The power to achieve your goals & dreams
182. “Youth is not a time of life; it is a state of mind. People grow old only
by deserting their ideals and by outgrowing the consciousness of youth. Years
wrinkle the skin, but to give up enthusiasm wrinkles the soul... You are as
old as your doubt, your fear, your despair. The way to keep young is to keep
your faith young. Keep your self-confidence young. Keep your hope young.”
- Dr. L.F. Phelan
183. Explore the healing powers of Chinese herbal medicine and
similar Eastern strategies for maintaining a state of perfect health
(consult an expert at all times and take a formal course on the subject
to gain powerful insights into this most useful area of healing).
184. Be certain to organize your time around the true priorities of your
life. As Stephen Covey has noted: “it is easy to say no when there is a
deeper yes burning within.”
185. Slow down your pace of life. In this complex age, we are running
our lives at a frantic pace. Focus on what is truly important and start
undertaking activities that will slow you down and rekindle the
natural, calm within us. Sit in the grass and watch the blue sky for half
an hour - at first, it is not as easy as one would think and the urge is to
get up after only a few minutes of such useful relaxation. Once you are
used to a healthier pace of living, with regular periods dedicated to the
simple pleasures of life, every other activity will become more efficient
and enjoyable.
186. Try eating only fruit and milk for a full day. Fasting is a powerful
success strategy of the East that millions use regularly to maintain peak
health and mental clarity. By trying this simple practice every few
weeks you will notice a surge in your energy level and a lightness in
your walk. Big meals require a significant amount of energy that could
be better directed toward more productive pursuits.
124
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
187. Value your spouse’s laugh and keep your partner’s picture close by
your work desk for inspiration and pleasant thoughts throughout the
day.
188. If you are married, have your partner’s initials and your own
engraved on the inside of your wedding bands along with the date of
your marriage. This is useful not only in case the rings are lost but to
provide you both with personalized keepsakes that may be passed
down to successive generations.
189. The mind is like a garden - as you sow, so shall you reap. When
you cultivate it and nurture it, it will blossom beyond your wildest
expectation. But if you let the weeds take over, you will never reach
your potential. What you put in is what you get out. So avoid violent
movies, trashy novels and all other negative influences. Peak
performers are meticulous about the thoughts they allow into the
gardens of their minds. You truly cannot afford the luxury of a single
negative thought.
190. Do a hundred sit ups a day and do not break this habit. Strong
abdominal muscles are very helpful to ensuring that you enjoy peak
health and injury free days. They also maintain your appearance and
confidence level.
191. Be the most honest person that you know. Be trustworthy -
worthy of the trust of others.
192. Curb your worldly desires and you will strengthen your will. He
who is deeply bound to material things runs into difficulty and
unhappiness when they are taken away. Happy people enjoy worldly
objects but do not become bound or wedded to them. Live a simple,
uncluttered and productive existence. To simplify your life today,
consider selling your television, stopping the junk mail, spending less,
learning yoga, selling your car, practising meditation every morning
and unplugging your ringing phone once in a while.
193. If you have not laughed today, you have not lived today. Laugh
hard and loud. As William James said: “we don’t laugh because we are
happy, we are happy because we laugh.”
194. Read The Charisma Factor - How to Develop Your Natural
Leadership Ability by Robert J. Richardson and S. Katharine Thayer. It
125
126 MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
is a superb book for any aspiring leader, or a current one, who seeks to
advance to the next level.
195. Travel often. The perspective offered by visiting new lands is
important and allows one to appreciate the existence that we generally
take for granted.
196. Each month set a physical fitness goal for yourself. Start to swim
in July or learn to ski in January. The key is to arrive at a goal for the
month, write it down, consider how to execute it and then, as the
NIKE ad says: “Just Do It!”.
197. Things are always created twice. There is always the mental
creation which precedes the physical creation. Just as plans for a house
must first be set down on paper before the house is started, so too
should your day be planned within your mind early in the morning
before the day begins. Visualize the wonders you desire this life to bring
and they will materialize as your subconscious mind starts to focus on
the attainment of goals. This is a true law of Nature.
198.Walk to work and notice the wonderful beauty in Nature.
199. Sleep less, spend less, do more, live longer and be greater.
200. Read this book over and over and share it with others!
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
THE ULTIMATE ACTION PLAN FOR MASTERY OF
YOUR MIND, BODY & CHARACTER
Welcome to the MegaLiving! 30 Day Program for Life Mastery.
This is a truly revolutionary personal growth plan that combines the
most effective strategies for lifelong success from both the East and
West. The powerful (and often little-known) techniques that you will
learn are easy to use and have helped many thousands achieve a more
satisfying, prosperous and rewarding life.
This program is designed to provide you with all the essential
skills needed to transform yourself into a peak performer at the game
of life. No matter how successful you currently are, how finely tuned
your mental attitude, body and character might be at the present time,
this 30 day program has all the ingredients to take your life to its
highest level. If you use your personal power to devote at least an hour
a day to the program, learning and applying the concepts consistently,
you will certainly notice profound improvements in the quality of your
life one month from today.
Each day, you will meet with little victories and will start to gain
a magical momentum and love for self-growth that will be
127
Our imagination is the only limit to what we can hope to have in the
future.
Charles F. Kettering
PART THREE
The MegaLiving! 30 Day Program
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
unstoppable. The exercises offered must be done in order to benefit
from the program. And if you give it a chance, dedication over this
month will lead you to the energy, health, serenity, positive attitude
and motivation that you have been searching for. Follow this lifechanging
program to achieve all your dreams. Follow this program and
live with the richness you deserve. Follow this program and put far
more living into your life.
The program is simple and easy to follow. Each of the following
thirty pages refers to a single day of the program. Each day will have
exercises, success tips and philosophies which you must apply that day.
Use the Success Log at the end of the book to chart your daily
progress. It is important that you enter your results into the Success
Log every day to provide yourself with a measure of your discipline and
to give you the momentum and inspiration to continue.
Welcome to the first day of your new life, a life of MegaLiving!
128
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
DAY 1 Date:_____________________________
PART I: THE MIND Goal-Setting Workshop
Today is the first day of the rest of your life. You must start preparing for what you
want to be in twenty or thirty years this very day, not twenty or thirty years from
today. You have learned in Parts I & II of the mind’s true potential and that you have
the incredible power to transform your life in a second if you really want to. Today,
make those changes you have put off for so long. Start living your dreams and finally
create a new personal destiny.
List your top ten i) _______________________________________
mind improvement goals ii) _______________________________________
for the next 30 days iii) _______________________________________
iv) _______________________________________
v) _______________________________________
vi) _______________________________________
vii) _______________________________________
viii) _______________________________________
ix) _______________________________________
x) _______________________________________
Go over this list at least three times today, repeating your burning commitment to
achieving these goals and a clear date by which you will have attained them. Let the
power of autosuggestion work for you as it has worked for so many success stories of
the past. Now think of all the pain you will feel if you do not make these
improvements - really see and feel it. Finally, think of all the pleasure you will have
if you indeed accomplish the above goals, how increased concentration, mental focus
& supreme confidence will enhance your life. Please review your mental goal list
every remaining day of the MegaLiving! program, even if for only a few seconds.
Part II: THE BODY
Today is the first day of your new physical reality. Over the next 29 days, you will
learn secrets for taking your body and physiology to its highest level. You will learn
how to condition it for peak health and peak life performance. Welcome to the path
of physical mastery.
List your top five i) _______________________________________
physical goals ii) _______________________________________
iii) _______________________________________
iv) _______________________________________
v) _______________________________________
Part III: THE CHARACTER
List the top five improvements in your character (your public and private self) which
you are determined to have over the coming month. Consider their importance and
repeat them aloud when you awake and immediately before you sleep for the next 29
days.
129
130 MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
DAY 2 Date:_____________________________
Part I: THE MIND The Power of Concentration
Without the ability to concentrate for long periods of time and focus your thoughts
on a single purpose or goal, there can be no real progress and no lasting life
achievement. Concentration also brings with it a quiet serene mind, one that does
not succumb to every weak thought trying to enter. A serene mind brings with it a
healthier body as your health is clearly rooted in your thoughts. Practice the
following two concentration exercises every remaining day of the program for a
minimum of 15 minutes.
Exercise 1: The Burning Candle - Find a very quiet spot at a quiet time. Light a
candle, making sure the room is otherwise dark. Look at the candle for as long as you
can and try not to blink. Study the shape of the flame, its texture and its movements.
Do not take your mental focus away from the flame - if its drifts off to something else,
gently pull your mind back and deeply concentrate on this beautifully empowering
light. Each day you do this, your concentration will improve and you can focus
without distraction for a longer time. You will also start to feel calmer and little things
will no longer ruffle you.
Exercise 2: The Stepping Strategy - One of the most effective methods to improve
weak thinking tendencies and a lack of concentration is step counting. The process
is simple yet the results will be striking. As you are walking, inhale to six steps, hold
your breath for another six and exhale for six more steps. Repeat the cycle and do not
let your mind wander away from your step counting.
Part II: THE BODY The Power of Exercise
Start your exercise program today and focus on cardiovascular conditioning. If you
are not fit, a fifteen minute walk in the fresh air at a moderate pace will be fine. If
you are fit, do whatever sport you have been doing, whether swimming, running,
squash or rollerblading, for an extra fifteen minutes. The key is to push your body. Do
some exercise every day for the next 28 if you want results.
Part III: THE CHARACTER The Power of Kindness
Your character will be shaped slowly and steadily over time. By making little daily
improvements, it will take on a new form and become full of strength, power and
vitality. Today, reflect on one of your top character improvement goals noted
yesterday. Develop a clear plan of why this new quality is important and what you
will do to have it. One of the most valuable qualities is that of kindness to others.
Kindness and consideration for those around you will ultimately give you lasting
happiness as well as personal, professional and social respect. Start off your day by
affirming aloud your commitment to becoming a kinder more considerate person.
Then visualize the wonderful day unfolding in your mind’s eye, taking care to focus
on every possible opportunity to show kindness to others. See this happening and it
will indeed happen.
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
DAY 3 Date:_____________________________
Part I: THE MIND The Power of Mental Conditioning and the 5 Questions of Success
Today, you will learn the power of conditioning your mind for success. The key to
achieving excellence in all areas of your life is to recognize that what you focus on
you will have. If you focus on all that is good and use mental pictures to fill your mind
with beautiful images, the laws of Nature will act to make them into reality.
One of the best ways to direct your mind’s focus is to use questions. From today
onwards, start your day off with a winner’s mindset by developing five Questions of
Success. Some of the best are as follows:
i) How can I make today a living masterpiece and what action must I take?
ii) What do I have to be grateful for? (make a complete mental list)
iii) What can I do today to improve my mind, body and spirit?
iv) How can I contribute to the world in some small way?
v) What can I do to laugh and have fun today?
These questions should become part of your life. Just as you brush your teeth after you
wake up, you must develop the habit of asking yourself these questions every
morning. It will only take a few minutes and you can do it in the shower. They will
very quickly change the way you feel and the way you act throughout the day. This
simple formula will bring you lasting results and enrich your life.
Part II: THE BODY Getting back to Nature
Nature can have a brilliant effect on an overworked body and mind. Realizing the
benefits of time with Nature is a first step to true relaxation and serenity. Today, make
a plan for some event to get you in touch with the natural world around you . It may
be as significant as a week camping and hiking in a national park or as simple as a
walk in the woods for half an hour. The key is to focus all your attention on the
surroundings and affirm the beauty and simplicity of the world. We make things
much more complex than they are and taking this time to look at that magnificent
blue sky or sit alongside a still lake is something that you deserve. Try to make such
activities part of your weekly exercise regimen.
Part III: THE CHARACTER Your Personal Success Journal
You have decided to make your life a living masterpiece. It is now important to record
your daily results, ideas, inspirations and challenges. There is something magical
about writing things down. Your thoughts and focus becomes clearer and plans
become burning desires when you commit them to the written form.
You do not require anything expensive - a simple coil notebook will do nicely. Write
daily, if possible but do not worry if you miss a day or two. The main idea is to note
down all your thoughts and how you plan to tackle any difficult situations. Journal
writing has become one of the most favored techniques to prevent worry. By writing
any problems down, they stop running over and over your mind. Once the problem
is isolated, you can develop a precise plan of attack and your serene mindset will
remain intact.
131
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
DAY 4 Date:_____________________________
Part I: THE MIND Autosuggestion and Dream-Building
Autosuggestion must become one of your main tools for personal mastery. Through
this age-old technique, a person without confidence will soon develop it, a person
with no motivation may soon attain it and one without material wealth can
ultimately have it. Autosuggestion is simple and involves nothing more than an
application of the following two-step formula:
i) Write down the goal your are determined to achieve (this can be anything
from confidence to making ten million dollars). Make certain that the goal
is precise and clear.
ii) Read the desired goal aloud as often as possible during the day but, at least
before you get up and prior to sleeping. Do the repetitions (or mantras as
they are often called) ten times at a time and really believe that they will
come true. A clearly defined goal, repeated regularly until it becomes a
burning desire will come true when it is combined with that all-important
ingredient of belief in its realization. Do not worry that it does not seem
that it will come true under your present circumstances. Simply persist and
follow this formula. Your mind will create the opportunities and the results.
Part II: THE BODY The Self-Massage
A full-body massage will make you feel like a million dollars and can be done by
yourself in just five minutes. The massage will lubricate your skin keeping it soft and
supple, ease any tension in your muscles and correspondingly, calm your mind while
providing a deep sense of relaxation and peace.
Buy yourself a bottle of sesame oil (available from any health store). Heat four or five
tablespoons in the microwave, being very careful not to make it too hot as you will
burn yourself. Then, in your bathroom, dip your fingers into the oil and start your
body massage. Start with your feet and legs rubbing vigorously, massaging any
tightness out. Then move to your stomach and abdomen where you should be more
gentle and use clockwise circular motions. Next is the back, neck and arms. Finally,
work your way on to your face, massaging your skin deeply. When the massage is
complete, soak in a hot bath if possible. This caps off the relaxation strategy with a
soothing activity and also removes the excess oil from your body. You can do the
personal massage daily for best results or once a week when you wish to relax and
have time for yourself.
Part III: THE CHARACTER Enhancing Your Social Environment
Today’s exercise is simple. Go to your local bookstore or library and get a copy of Dale
Carnegie’s How to Win Friends and Influence People. Read it completely over the next
week. Think deeply about its wisdom and start to apply its philosophy.
132
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
DAY 5 Date:_____________________________
Part I: THE MIND Mastery of Your Concentration Skills
The key to success in life, you might be surprised to learn, is simply mental
concentration. With a concentrated mind, you will live not in the past, not in the
future but in the present. When you learn to concentrate effectively, big problems
become small and you can see things in the world that were previously invisible. You
will be able to work more efficiently without the burden of a wandering mind that
worries about past difficulties and actions. Things will come easily and you can move
quickly to achieve your ambitions and desires. Concentration brings deep peace of
mind. The stronger your mind, the lovelier life becomes. Life is very much like a rose.
There are thorns along the path but once you rise above them, there is true and
lasting beauty. Remember the rose and its wonderful properties. Today’s exercise is a
fun one:
Buy a single rose. Place it in a quiet spot and stare at it for as long as possible. Focus
on its brilliant qualities, its splendid texture and fragrance. Do not take your sight or
mind off the rose. Other thoughts will come into your mind if you have not trained
it for concentration. Do not worry, gently let the thoughts pass away like a cloud
moves through the blue sky and return your attention to the rose. Practice this
essential exercise every day. It is among the most important. Once you can focus
without interruption for twenty minutes, you will have reached the level where your
mind is conditioned to do very special things for you. You will be amazed at the
changes in life such mental toughness brings.
Part II: THE BODY Voice Conditioning - An Ancient Technique for Vitality
The ancient Tibetans believed that the health of the body was controlled through
the operation of seven spinning vortexes. When the vortexes slowed down,
hormonal changes would cause the process of aging to set in. One of the vortexes,
located deep in the neck, governs the vocal chords. If the voice is strengthened, the
vortex is stimulated to produce an optimal state of health. This is why Tibetan monks
would perform chants daily. Not only would such vocal conditioning enhance their
all-important concentration skills but it would yield remarkable physical results in
the form of peak health.
Exercise: Repeat “Mimm” over and over for at least five minutes a day. Perhaps the
best time to do this is whilst you shower. For the best results, gradually lower your
voice with each repetition until you can do the entire exercise in the lowest voice
you have.
Part III: THE CHARACTER Courtesy
“Manners maketh man” wrote a literary scholar many years ago. Showing politeness
to everyone you meet will make your character mighty and dramatically improve
your relationships. Today, make an action list of all the chances you will have to show
courtesy to those around you, to show that you appreciate them. Then, use these
opportunities to grow. Remember that no one can insult you without your
permission. If any one is rude, do not stoop to their level but remain graceful and
poised. Never raise your voice and be known as a highly self-disciplined person, kind
yet strong.
133
134 MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
DAY 6 Date:_____________________________
Part I: THE MIND Becoming a Mental Explorer
Mental stimulation is essential for good health and intellectual growth. Through this
book you have learned that you are likely only using 25% of your mind’s potential, at
best. You must work hard and become the mental giant you are capable of being. Do
not pay attention to what others may have said about your abilities. Accept no
limitations on yourself and what you can achieve because there truly are none.
You must become a mental explorer, an individual dedicated to learning about the
powers of the mind and its incredible abilities. The first step is to have an open mind.
Meditation, yoga, focusing and visualization are a key part of the peak performance
regimens of many of the world’s top athletes. Seinfeld practices yoga daily and a
significant number of business executives have found peace and good health through
various meditation techniques.
Exercise: Visit your local library or bookstore and study the success literature. Pick
up two of the stranger sounding titles and read their contents. Remain open to new
ideas you are exposed to in the field of personal development. Try new things.
Part II: THE BODY Sleep Less and Live More
Your body needs only six hours sleep per night to be in peak condition yet many
people sleep much longer. There are only 168 hours in a week and so many exciting
things to do. One of the very best strategies to increase your productivity is to sleep
one hour less per night. Sleeping too much is caused by a bad habit. To have a fuller,
more accomplished life, break this habit and sleep only as much as you need.
Start slowly by arising half an hour earlier tomorrow. After three days, cut back to the
full one hour. You will notice that it gets much easier as time goes on. After three
weeks, you will wonder why you wasted this time previously. A key principle to
remember is that if you do anything for 21 consecutive days, it becomes a habit and
much easier to do. Stick it out for this period and you will find that you suddenly have
all the time you once said you never had. This is a powerful success secret which can
impact on your life in a positive, dramatic way.
Part III: THE CHARACTER The Abundance Mentality
One of the primary laws of Nature is that the more you give and the more you serve
others, the more you get. Too many people live with a scarcity mentality believing
that if they share ideas, wealth or resources, there will be less left for them. This is the
surest way to a life of little. Develop the habit of doing things for others, especially
those in need. Give money to your favorite charity and do not shy away from public
service. Work with others in both your business and the community. Shed the “us
versus them” mentality and recognize the powers of synergy: two hands are stronger
than one.
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
DAY 7 Date:_____________________________
Part I: THE MIND Your Photographic Memory
One of the best kept secrets is that every person has a photographic memory locked
deep inside of them - the key is to unlock it and bring it to life. When you last forgot
something recall how it later came back to you. The fact was in your memory - it was
just asleep and it needed to be prompted. All the details you have ever experienced
are deep inside of your mind, waiting for the correct trigger.
The best way to tap your true memory potential is to give direct commands to your
subconscious mind once it is in a state of readiness. To do this, you must first become
very relaxed. Lie down on your back in a quiet place. Take twenty deep breaths,
visualizing any tension leaving your body with each exhale.
Then, moving from your feet to the head, command the body to relax very deeply.
For example, starting at your feet, say “my feet are now very heavy, I feel the
heaviness.” Then move up through the ankles, calves, thighs, etc. Soon you will
notice that your body is feeling very warm and entirely relaxed. At this stage, the
subconscious part of your mind, which is exceptionally powerful, is most open to your
commands. Repeat for five minutes, the following command: “I have a perfect
memory, I can remember anything I want to recall at will, my memory is perfect and
there to serve me.”
Do this for a period of 21 days and you will notice a truly remarkable transformation.
Part II: THE BODY The Power of Breath
Deep breathing will provide you with tremendous relaxation, vitality and energy.
Deep breathing triggers the lymph, your body’s sewage system which will give your
cells more efficiency. Deep breathing also ensures that the blood is fully oxygenated,
also providing for peak health.
Exercise: Deep breathing must occur to the following ratio: 1-4-2. If you inhale for
two seconds, you should hold your breath for eight seconds and then exhale to the
count of four. By practicing this cycle in repetitions of 10, three times a day, you will
significantly increase your stamina and general state of health.
Part III: THE CHARACTER Persistence Breeds Success
Every great person has failed on more than one occasion. Edison is said to have failed
10,000 times before he finally struck it big with the light bulb. When asked his secret
to success, he replied: “I failed so many times that the only thing left to do was to
succeed - I exhausted all the failures.” As reported in the biography on Ted Turner, It
Ain’t As Easy As It Looks, what struck Turner’s schoolmates was his extraordinary
persistence. He always stayed with a goal until he eventually achieved it. Nothing
can keep a good person down and the sooner you realize this the better. Rather than
whining over problems and asking why they always seem to happen to you, start
calling problems “challenges” and looking forward to them as tests of character and
opportunities to learn and grow. You will always meet with challenges on the path of
life but the champion learns to love them, learns from them and thrives on them.
135
136 MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
DAY 8 Date:_____________________________
Part I: THE MIND More Concentration Conditioning
The importance of mental concentration has been emphasized over and over in the
MegaLiving! program. Today, you will learn yet another exercise to toughen up your
mind, getting it ready for super performance.
Exercise: The Two Minute Mind
This is a delightful exercise to strengthen a mind that suffers from wandering
thoughts and a lack of ability to concentrate. All you have to do is to stare at the
second hand on your watch for two minutes. Give your full attention to the second
hand and do not let any other thoughts occupy your attention. Your whole world is
in the movements of the second hand and use your will-power to do this exercise
properly. If you perform the technique three times a day, after 21 days, you will have
developed a highly powerful mind and will notice a real difference in your energy
level as well as in your overall mental agility.
Part II: THE BODY The Amazing Benefits of Yoga
If there is one thing you can do to take your physical dimension to the highest plane
it is to practise yoga. Classes are offered in all cities and the positions are easy to learn
and wonderfully relaxing. Regular yoga practice will keep you serene, energetic,
improve your complexion and digestion and enhance your overall muscle tone. Take
this powerful step now! You have absolutely nothing to lose and so much to gain.
Part III: THE CHARACTER The Value of Friendship
Good friendships have been proven not only to make life more enjoyable but to give
a longer one. Researchers from the University of Michigan found that Tecumseh,
Michigan residents who had the most family and friends lived the longest. Several
studies have also found that married people live longer than their single counterparts.
Take today as an opportunity to dramatically improve your friendships. Pick five
friends who you want to become closer with and write out their names. Then write
out why you value their friendship. Finally, make a precise action plan to improve the
friendship. It may be as simple as writing them a letter expressing your appreciation
for their friendship and attaching an inspirational article of interest to them. You may
buy your friend a book and drop it off personally to them saying, “I was at the
bookstore and found this treasure I thought you would love.” Take a friend out for a
Sunday brunch or for a walk along the ocean to see the sun rise one morning. Even
the act of writing out a “love letter” to a friend, which you never have to send, will
improve the relationship as it clarifies in your mind the importance of this person in
your life.
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life 137
DAY 9 Date:_____________________________
Part I: THE MIND Opting for Optimism
Optimism will change your life. If you expect your life to be a living masterpiece you
will be happier, live longer and have all that this magical world can offer. Researchers
studied 99 young Harvard men for the effects of optimism. By the time the study was
published in 1988, the cheerier individuals were less affected with severe illnesses
than their pessimistic counterparts.
Optimism can be learned. Every day, think deeply about all the good things you have
in life. Everyone has something to be grateful for. The difference between optimists
and pessimists is that the former look for and find the good in everything. A pessimist
always sees and remembers the bad. For example, an optimist looks back on the day
and smiles at the kindness he received, the good meals he ate, the family he is
fortunate enough to have been surrounded by and the good health that he has
enjoyed. A pessimist sees none of this and focuses on one or two challenges that may
have appeared. He then concludes that this “was a bad day” and continues to brood
over these minor difficulties for the rest of the day. In the wonderful little book, As a
Man Thinketh, James Allen wrote: Let a man radically alter his thoughts, and he will be
astonished at the rapid transformation it will affect in the material conditions of his life.
Good thoughts are guaranteed to lead to sunny circumstances. Optimism is an
essential condition for success. Resolve to curb your wandering mind and start the
habit of positive thinking today! Make certain every word you say is a good one, every
thought you think is an inspiring one and every act you take an uplifting one.
Part II: THE BODY Strong Body = Strong Mind
Rousseau said: “a feeble body enfeebles the mind.” Physically strong people are
mentally tough people. Build your physical strength and you will reap just rewards.
Here are exercises you should work into your physical regimen today and every day
after:
i) pushups and sit-ups
ii) the military chest press
iii) bicep curls with weights to improve your arms
iv) beach running to improve your legs
v) aerobic classes to improve your heart and lungs
vi) triceps pressdowns, squats
Part III: THE CHARACTER More Journal Writing
Congratulations! You are on Day 9 of the MegaLiving! program and are on the way
to becoming the very best that you can be. The fact that you have come this far
confirms that you are among the minority of people who have the discipline to persist
in order to achieve self-mastery. Write for five minutes in your journal all the benefits
you have noticed and all that you have learned about personal power and your own
positive qualities over the past eight days. List your weaknesses as well: thoughts that
are preventing true happiness, bad habits that are denying you the bountiful life that
you are now certain is yours and factors in your life which you must change.
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
DAY 10 Date:_____________________________
Part I: THE MIND The Power of the Book: Readers are Leaders!
One of, if not the most important thing you can do for self-mastery is incredibly easy:
read something inspiring and valuable every day. Reading can take you to new
heights as knowledge truly is power. Reading will give you brilliant ideas on how to
improve every aspect of your life. The key is to surround yourself with such thoughts
so you are forced to think positively and to accept no limitations.
All the mistakes of this world have already been made and their solutions appear in
books. Is there really any point in making them again? The trick in life is to make it
easier, not harder and the habit of reading will certainly do this for you. Start your
own personal excellence library and make the following ten books its foundation:
i) Think and Grow Rich, Napoleon Hill
ii) The Autobiography of Ben Franklin
iii) The Power of the Subconscious Mind, Dr. Joseph Murphy
iv) The Power of Positive Thinking, Rev. Norman Vincent Peale
v) Siddhartha, Herman Hesse
vi) The Story of My Experiments with Truth, Mahatma Ghandi
vii) As a Man Thinketh, James Allen
viii) The Pursuit of Happiness, David Myers
ix) How to Win Friends and Influence People, Dale Carnegie
x) The Magic of Believing, Claude Bristol
Part II: THE BODY Stop Acting Your Age: The Importance of Good Posture
If you act old you will be old. Why buy into the myth that you must age according to
a certain schedule and process. Why not resolve to beat age and live a youthful,
passionate existence? The first step is to physically act young. Improve your posture,
ensuring that your back is straight. It allows you to breathe properly.
Also, take purposeful steps and do not walk like an old person. The essence of
youthful living is to prevent an elderly person from moving into your body and you
can do so by thinking and living young.
Part III: THE CHARACTER Broadening Your Worldview
One of the most beneficial things you can do for yourself is to travel the world.
Travelling shows you what the world is like and, importantly, how very lucky you are.
In the heat of everyday life, we tend to let the little things take on a much greater
importance than they should. Who cares if the paper came late today or if the boss
was in a bad mood? Do you have food on your table? Are you living in a state of war?
Learning about the world, even through reading if you cannot travel, will put things
into perspective and ensure that you realize all of the gifts life has bestowed on you.
Do not waste another minute worrying about the small troubles and past events. You
are more than this and today is the day to rise to the heights where you are certainly
capable of living.
138
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
DAY 11 Date:_____________________________
Part I: THE MIND The Master Blaster Technique for Personal Excellence
A highly positive self-image is essential for mastery of your mind, body and character.
Every moment of every hour of every day, you must guard against thoughts that
damage your self-image. Once you start thinking such thoughts (i.e., I am not
intelligent, charismatic etc.), they soon become habit forming and seriously affect
your performance in life.
A very valuable technique to rid yourself of negative self images is the Master Blaster.
Write down a list of all the negative qualities you believe that you have. Now find a
quiet place and get into a very deep state of relaxation (perhaps by deep breathing or
by some of the other strategies you have learned in this book).
Once you are relaxed, picture the negative self-image and quality (i.e., if it is
overeating and obesity, picture yourself gorging at a meal and being overweight).
Now make the image in your mind’s eye clearer - really see it. Now, most importantly,
visualize two sticks of dynamite being placed at both ends of the picture and, with the
lighting of a match, watch the negative self-image explode into a hundred million
tiny pieces. See the image shattered! Now immediately replace the old image with a
bright, clear, big one of the quality you desire to have or the way you wish to look.
Repeat the entire process at least 20 times on the first try and then about five times
a day for the next 21 days. Your self-image will dramatically improve with this very
special exercise.
Part II: THE BODY Sticking with Your Exercise Program
Over the past 10 days, you should have been doing at least 20 minutes of exercise
every day. If you are not fit, gentle walks through the woods or swimming will help.
If you are fortunate enough to be in shape, you should be doing more than 20 minutes
and pushing yourself towards the higher levels you are capable of achieving.
One of your most important life habits should be to exercise vigorously at least four
or five times a week. If you can do it everyday without straining your body all the
better. Such physical conditioning keeps you young, aids in your digestion and
general health and significantly improves your energy reserves. No more excuses, take
Nike’s advice and “Just Do It!”
Part III: THE CHARACTER Purging Your World of Worries
It is tremendously important to have a relaxed, serene mind. A calm mind will do
wonders for you and lead to a strong, vital body. A mind free of worries and negative
thoughts must be your first priority if you want a truly happy life. Like most other
things, a positive, winning mindset can be cultivated through practice.
Exercise: Make a list of every single thing that is worrying you. List your loans, any
challenges at work, health troubles - everything. The very act of writing out the list
is most beneficial and freeing. Once you have listed everything you can think of, from
the smallest worry to the biggest, rip up the list into as many pieces as possible and
see your worries crumble into the dustbin. Bruce Lee, the martial arts legend, used a
similar technique to free himself of any negative thoughts.
139
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
DAY 12 Date:_____________________________
Part I: THE MIND Building a Routine for Mental Toughness
You are at the stage of this program where you have learned the strategies for success
practised by the great citizens of this world. Meditation, focusing, deep breathing and
visualization techniques have now become part of your success arsenal. The key is to
develop a routine so that you use them daily to ensure that you stay at the very top
of your game. Set aside at least thirty to forty minutes every morning to attend to your
personal development, the earlier the better. Get into the following routine:
i) Five minutes: Ask yourself 5 Questions for Success.
• What will I do to make today a masterpiece? (picture it)
• What am I grateful for? (list everything)
• What will I improve today?
• Who will I serve today?
• What will make me laugh today?
ii) Fifteen minutes: Get into a serene mindset by meditating
Meditation is practised by millions of superachievers and it has now gone mainstream.
Do not fear that it is something done by the flowerchildren of the 1960’s and
is not for you. Elite athletes use it for peak performance and so should you. Nothing
calms your overworked mind better. Practise focusing on a flower or pleasant object
for fifteen minutes. Think of nothing else. Build up the muscle of your mind so that
you are in total control and think only of the object. Over the weeks, you will notice
that the little thoughts that used to ruin your mood and distract you can be expelled
from your mind instantly.
iii) Ten minutes: Get inspired to seize this day!
“Happiness is not a state to arrive at but a manner of travelling,” said Margaret
Runbeck. This is so very true and every second of your life must be happy. The trick
is to surround yourself with happy thoughts and things. Here is a huge secret:
happiness is a habit. Happiness is not something which develops because you win the
lottery or get a great job. Some of the world’s happiest people are its poorest or ones
that have endured tremendous hardship. But they developed the habit of looking for
the positive in everything. Surround yourself with inspirational books, tapes and
pictures. For ten minutes, at the very least, read a dynamic book that will supercharge
your spirit.
Part II: THE BODY Goal Review
Review your physical goals from Day 1. Are you doing something each day to move
towards them? Keep planning your approach, write inspiring notes to yourself aimed
at attaining your goals.
Part III: THE CHARACTER Fun Exercise
Today’s exercise is easy. Rent It’s A Wonderful World (Jimmy Stewart) from the video
store and watch it tonight. What does it teach you and what secrets for success have
you learned?
140
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
DAY 13 Date:_____________________________
Part I: THE MIND Mental Racewalking
Over and over, this program has emphasized that your mind can be sharpened and
strengthened to perform things that you have never believed possible. You can
increase your peace of mind, concentration powers, will-power, memory and
creativity, among other things, by training.
One of the most effective ways to charge up your mind so that you will excel at
mental activity (i.e., at work or on an important essay at school) is Mental
Racewalking. The way to warm up the mind for peak mental performance is to speed
it up. Do the following exercise:
Mental racewalking: Pick up a newspaper or a magazine. Select any noun in any
article (i.e., health in the Health Section). Now for five minutes, as quickly as possible
and without stopping write down everything that your mind associates with the word
“health”. After five minutes, relax for a minute by deep breathing and move on to
your project or essay.
Part II: THE BODY Nutritional Excellence
To get the most out of life and to have the energy to do all the things that you have
now been motivated to do, you must be very careful of what you put into your body.
Bad foods will slow you down, affect your moods and keep you from perfect health.
A diet high in fruits and vegetables will keep you strong, energetic and highly vital.
Today, take fifteen minutes and list all the things you have eaten over the past two
days. If you cannot remember, list the things you generally eat. Notice all the high
fat offenders like whole milk products, fried foods, snack foods, creamy salad
dressings, pastries and cheeses. Eliminate 25% of these this week alone. This will not
be as hard as it sounds given all the low-fat alternatives at your grocery store. For
example, low-fat cheese, milk and meats are available everywhere.
Also, follow these powerful tips for health excellence:
i) Stop overeating. Eat only what you need and push the rest away.
ii) Have as much fresh fruit as you can in the morning.
iii) Do not eat after 8 p.m.
iv) Eat a salad with every meal (it will help your digestion and increase your
energy level significantly). Also, reduce your meat intake.
Part III: THE CHARACTER Manage Your Time!
Time is one of the most precious commodities you have. We have 168 hours in a
week. How much of this time are you wasting? Two hours of TV a night is 14 hours
a week. This is a full day of time that you could have spent building up your health,
enriching your relationships, writing that book you have always talked about or
taking a new initiative at work that would make you the standout you know you are.
Stop wasting time!
Make a list of all the time wasters in your life that are sucking away your productivity.
Stop gossiping on the phone, hanging out at the coffee room and focus on the things
that are really important to achieving your dreams. The minute lost is gone forever.
141
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
DAY 14 Date:_____________________________
Part I: THE MIND Break All the Rules!
The superachievers of this world, those people who live each second to the maximum
and are living their dreams have one thing in common: they accept no limitations on
what they can have from this life. You too must shatter the rules about what you can
become, what you can do with your life, the rules about the health that you must have
and the limits on the fun in your day. Why can’t you become a millionaire, sail around
the Caribbean, travel to Bali, write a best selling novel, run a marathon or learn to fly?
Change your mindset today. Start getting exposed to the people of this world who have
done these things with much less ability than you. If someone says you are too old to
start your own business, think otherwise. If someone says you are not fit enough to
become a competitive runner, train harder than ever and show them that they know
nothing about who you are.
Exercise: Dreaming For Personal Excellence - Make a list of the top 10 dreams that
you have. Be creative and the more fun the better. List only those things you really want
to have happen. Now think, emotionally, about what it would feel like if those dreams
came true. What would your family say and how would it improve your life. Next, write
out one thing you will do over the next week, no matter how small, to get on the path
of attaining your dreams. If your goal is sailing to the Bahamas, sign up for sailing lessons
tomorrow - DO IT! If your goal is to start a business, look for one of the many seminars
available on the subject and go to it. Meet others who want to do the same thing for
ideas, inspiration and motivation. Take action every single day to move towards your
dreams. If you really want them to come true, if you really want to have all that is yours,
start today, not ten years from today.
Part II: THE BODY Physical Conditioning - The Next Level
“First say to yourself what you would be and then do what you have to do” wrote
Emerson. In Day 1 of the MegaLiving! program you committed yourself to achieving
certain physical goals. You should now be on the path towards them. Everything is about
habit and you should now be into the habit of exercise, even if only for 20 minutes a
day. Exercise is the secret fountain of youth. It is so very simple to do and the benefits
are enormous. Keep up your routine. If possible, take your physical conditioning to a
higher level today. Run just a little faster, swim just a little longer or walk up that long
hill you have avoided climbing for the past two weeks.
Part III: THE CHARACTER Life Tips
i) Be the most enthusiastic person you know. Be kind, be strong and be serene.
ii) Act youthful, live with an air of fun, laugh hard, laugh often.
iii) Go to bed early and wake up before 6 am. Pray.
iv) Be humble, save 10% of your income every month and give something to
charity yearly.
v) Control your emotions and never get angry. Count to 10 if you feel anger.
vi) Associate with positive, active and loving people.
vii) Eat moderately using light food and have a balanced diet.
viii) Be honest in everything you do. Be noble and courteous. Guard your
reputation.
ix) Fast once a month, taking mild fruits only. It is very cleansing.
x) Achieve your dreams, think big but keep it simple.
142
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
DAY 15 Date:____________________________
Part I: THE MIND More Affirmations for Excellence
Autosuggestion will make things happen for you. Any thought, when constantly
repeated, affects the powerful subconscious mind. Once the thought is accepted, your
will is then directed towards the accomplishment of the goal. This technique,
however strange it might seem, has been used with tremendous success for many
years. Napoleon Hill, the man who studied hundreds of America’s most successful
people, urged it on his readers in Think and Grow Rich. The strategy works so make it
a tool for your personal mastery. Below are six of the most effective affirmations
which you should repeat to yourself throughout the day (it is essential for you to say
the affirmation with great emotion and belief in its truth):
i) “I am serene, strong and happy”
ii) “I have everything I want in this world and am grateful”
iii) “Every day, I get better and better”
iv) “Wealth-Success”
v) “I have tremendous energy and vitality”
vi) “I am young, healthy and tranquil”
Part II: THE BODY Boosting Your Longevity
Over the next 15 days, incorporate the following powerful longevity tips into your
life:
i) After age 50, your oil glands start to slow down. It is key that you keep
your skin looking youthful and supple by using a moisturizer containing
lanolin or the oils of coconut, safflower or wheat germ. Use it right after
you get out of the shower.
ii) Try using Retin-A. This is the so-called youth ingredient that reduces age
lines on your face. The prescription cream encourages the growth of new
skin proteins, blood vessels and speeds the removal of dead skin cells.
iii) A regular weight training plan when combined with aerobic activity will
make you look years younger.
iv) Take a brisk walk every day. In a study of 16, 936 Harvard Alumni, those
who engaged in physical activity clearly had lower death rates.
Part III: THE CHARACTER Enthusiasm
“Nothing great was ever achieved without enthusiasm,” said Ralph Waldo Emerson
whilst ‘Twain attributed the secret of his success to the fact that “I was born excited.”
In survey after survey, leaders say that enthusiasm is key to success. To develop
enthusiasm you must determine what fires your soul. You don’t have to sit chained to
a desk from nine to five every day. Determine what it is you love to do and then do
it. The passion which comes from doing that which you love creates enthusiasm. Put
an elastic band around your wrist. This is “the band of enthusiasm.” Today and every
day after, you must be the most enthusiastic person you know. The band will remind
you of the many benefits of enthusiasm and of your commitment to be enthusiastic
and zestful throughout this wonderful day.
143
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
DAY 16 Date:_____________________________
Part I: THE MIND The Mini-Vacation
It is essential, if you are to meet with true self-mastery, that you remove all tension
from your body. Too much stress impedes performance and prevents you from tapping
the huge potential lying dormant inside of you. Stress reduction exercises must
become a part of your daily routine and will only take a few minutes of your time.
Once you start using them, you will feel much calmer, stronger and happier.
Exercise: Sit in a quiet place and get comfortable. If you are in your office, shut the
door and hold all calls. Shut your eyes and start breathing deeply. Inhale watching
the belly move out like a big balloon. Hold the breath and then exhale fully. In your
mind’s eye, see all your worries and tension flooding out of you like a chimney
spewing out smoke. Keep breathing deeply for two minutes, each time feeling yourself
becoming more and more relaxed. Focus only on the breathing.
Now, starting with your feet, feel that your body is getting incredibly heavy. Your
ankles are sinking towards the floor with the weight. Then feel your legs loosening
up, visualize the muscles relaxing and all tension vanishing. Move up through the
torso, arms, neck and head. You will now feel exceptionally relaxed. Now imagine
you are on vacation. You have all the time in the world. You have no watch and no
appointments. You find yourself barefoot in a lush, green forest. Hear the birds
chirping and the bubbling brook in the distance. Smell the wild roses and lavender
in the bushes. As you walk, feel the moist earth against your soles. See the sunlight
peeking through the trees at certain places, warming up that particular area as you
walk by. You walk through this stunningly green forest to a lake. The lake is calm like
a plate of glass and you study the reflections the trees make on the surface of the
water. Your mind is as tranquil as this lake. You feel deeply calm and at one with
nature. This is your mini-vacation. Enjoy it. Now open your eyes and go back to
work, refreshed, relaxed and alive.
Part II: THE BODY Banishing Your Belly
Strong abdominal muscles are very important for peak health. As we get older, it
becomes more and more difficult to keep the stomach toned and lean. The trick to a
taut stomach is to lose the fat by aerobic exercise, build the muscle below the surface
by weight training or sit-ups and keep the stomach thin by eating a light diet with
low-fat foods. Each day for the next fourteen, do 20 sit-ups.
Part III: THE CHARACTER Becoming a Better Lover
If you want to be a chef, you do not simply walk into a kitchen and say you are a chef.
You must train. If you want to be a teacher, you don’t walk into the classroom and
start to teach, you train. In the same vein, you were not born a lover. To get the most
out of your relationships and really love those around you, you must train and work
at being a great lover. On a piece of paper, list those people you want to become closer
to, those people you really want to love. Now, write out a “love letter” to each one.
You will not send it so be as expressive and open as possible. Really tell them how
you feel and what you think of them. Be romantic, be creative, be silly but be sincere.
The very act of writing these love letters is very fulfilling and will tap your “love
skills”. Finally, take some action to improve these relationships this week.
144
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
DAY 17 Date:_____________________________
Part I: THE MIND Revisiting Kaizen: Constant and Never Ending Improvement
This book has emphasized the importance of Kaizen: daily improvement in all aspects
of your life. The very fact that you are doing this program and have come this far
shows that you are a breed apart from the average person who believes that things
cannot be changed and they must accept the deck that life has dealt them. Each and
every day, take a step, no matter how small, to improve yourself. This is the essence
of MegaLiving! If you take such steps daily, the results will start to become more and
more noticeable until they snowball and every aspect of your life moves to a higher
level. Here are a few suggestions for using the principle of Kaizen today:
i) Start your memoirs
ii) Unplug your TV and really communicate to those around you
iii) Write five letters to old friends (a wonderful habit!)
iv) Finish everything you start today
v) Stretch yourself and do something gutsy!
vi) Sign up for a language course, take jazz trumpet lessons
vii) Read three different newspapers today and write to the editor
viii) Go to the opera tonight, the symphony or the ballet - explore life!
ix) Listen to the radio, review your financial goals, dream
x) Visualize the person you are determined to become
Part II: THE BODY Energizing Yourself
You will not reach your goals without energy. Ghandi slept four hours a night. He had
both the energy and the desire to lead his country to independence. Here are some
of the best strategies for increasing your energy levels (select two to incorporate into
your daily routine):
i) Be active. Paradoxically, you will have more energy if you expend it.
ii) Use the deep breathing techniques in this book.
iii) Eat energizing foods: fresh fruits and vegetables
iv) Nothing drains energy more than worrying. Relax, meditate and loosen up.
v) Use autosuggestion: repeat “I am totally juiced up and energetic!”
vi) Take a brisk walk after dinner, if only for ten minutes
vii) Listen to your favorite music that has charged you up in the past
viii) Take a power-nap if you are tired (15 minutes maximum)
Part III: THE CHARACTER More Journal Writing
Take out your success journal and write out in a detailed way all the changes you are
noticing in your thoughts and in your life. What positive things are happening to
you? What challenges are you still facing and what will you do to overcome them and
reach all the goals you set for yourself on Day 1? List the strategies and ideas you have
learned to date from the MegaLiving! program. Now congratulate yourself for getting
this far and moving closer to the ideal life that you deserve.
145
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
DAY 18 Date:_____________________________
Part I: THE MIND The Power of Music
“Music has charms to soothe a savage beast” wrote the English poet William
Congreve. Music can be used to ensure that your mindset remains serene and
focused. People are only now starting to realize the many wonderful effects music has
on our moods. Many Olympic athletes are using music as part of their training
regimen. Make it a part of yours.
When you wish to enter a state of tranquility, classical music works best. Pieces such
as Pachelbel’s Canon are incredibly soothing and will transport you to another world.
Set aside a time, perhaps after dinner, to sit down and concentrate fully on the music.
Let it enter your soul and work its charms. Jazz music also works wonders and provides
a lift to your spirit keeping it soaring and inspired. If you don’t want to buy this music,
simply listen to the many classical and jazz stations on your radio. Radio is excellent
and provides many benefits.
Part II: THE BODY Think Healthy - Be Healthy
Many doctors are now recognizing that our thoughts affect our immune system and
our general health. Emotional states such as fear and sadness are processed in the
limbic system and hypothalamus which then send signals to body’s immune system
via chemicals called neuropeptides. The current philosophy argues that a mental
image of a healthy body can be communicated from the brain to the immune system’s
cells which act in such a fashion so as to duplicate the mental image that was held in
the mind.
Cancer patients have effectively used creative visualization and imagery exercises to
picture immune cells killing the cancerous ones, sometimes with startling results. You
can use this strategy for maintaining a state of perfect health. Simply get yourself into
a relaxed state of mind using one of the calming techniques you have learned. Then,
in a detailed way, picture yourself in a perfect state physically. See your skin glow and
your face looking healthy. See yourself as lean, energetic and happy. Do this exercise
twice a day for the next few months and you will reap positive rewards in your selfesteem
as well as in your general health condition.
Part III: THE CHARACTER The Ideal Person
Practise the 6 virtues of the Ideal Person:
i) Self-mastery in all situations
ii) Self-control of all of the senses
iii) Control in diet and soberness
iv) Self-command of temper and desires
v) Humility in success, hope in defeat
vi) Compassion to all, moderation in life and persistence in goals
146
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
DAY 19 Date:_____________________________
Part I: THE MIND Tapping Your Creativity
It is essential that you develop your mental creativity muscles. With enhanced
creativity, you will create all sorts of ideas to help you in your quest for personal
excellence and the Perfect Life. Creativity will also make your life more playful,
joyous and rewarding.
First put yourself into a relaxed frame of mind for today’s exercise. A new technique
you may use is to shut your eyes and vividly picture a blackboard. Gradually, words
start to appear on the board and as you look closer you see your name with the word
“relax” next to it, all the way down the long blackboard. Study the blackboard and
clearly see these words on it.
Now , with your eyes still shut, picture yourself as you were when you were a six year
old child. What likes did you have and what things did you do for fun? Tap the happy,
creative and lively child sleeping inside of you. How did you see adults then? What
pranks did you play? Visualize all of this and make it fun. For the rest of today, see
things as a child might. Shake up your perspective. At the office or in your home,
stand on a chair and see what it looks like up there. Do something you have never
done like visiting an art gallery or riding a roller coaster. Focus on being creative and
playful in the things you do. You will never be the same!
Part II: THE BODY More Exercise
Your exercise program should be well underway and part of your daily routine. You
must now have started to see and feel the powerful results that this simple activity
can bring. Today, in your journal, write down five benefits of exercise. Then, from a
magazine or the newspaper, find a picture of someone with the physical condition
that you want to have. Get a hero or a role model and tape the image to your
bathroom mirror or even better, to the fridge. Look at it regularly and focus on
developing such a shape.
Part III: THE CHARACTER Becoming a Leader
Start to develop the 10 Master Keys of Leadership:
i) Belief in your dreams
ii) Courage and supreme persistence
iii) Enthusiasm
iv) Consideration for others
v) Self-control and self-mastery
vi) Well-developed social skills and diplomacy
vii) The habit of doing far more than expected
viii) Long-term planning and organization
ix) Calculated risk taking
x) A burning desire to succeed and faith in success
147
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
DAY 20 Date:_____________________________
Part I: THE MIND Raising Your Standards
Today make the decision that will surely change your life: raise your standards. Raise
the level of what you expect of yourself, the way you treat your body, the thoughts
you put into your mind and the way you live your life. Do not accept mediocrity. Give
up being a member of the pack. Commit yourself to true life excellence. Be the very
best you can be and start giving 110% in every single area of your life from your
relationships to your professional activities.
Here are the 5 Keys to making excellence your life-standard:
i) Change your attitude. Most successful people develop an attitude which
prevents them from being anything but the best.
ii) Get in the habit of being outstanding. Once you take small steps each
day to confirm your new standard of working, playing and living, there
will be no going back after a few months. MegaLiving! will be your habit.
iii) Publicize your new standards to those closest to you. Get some pressure
on yourself to ensure that you do not budge from your commitment to
living every moment of life to the fullest.
iv) Remember your “old self.” Anytime you think of the bad habits that you
are changing or the past standards that you once lived by, proudly tell
yourself that that was the way you were - that was the old you and you will
never go back.
v) Try to get others to raise their standards with you. We all can explode
our limitations in a second if we make the simple decision to do so.
Part II: THE BODY Serene Body = Serene Mind
It has been emphasized throughout the MegaLiving! program that it is essential that
you develop a serene, relaxed mindset which will guarantee your success as a peak
performer. This comes with practice. You have learned exercises to dramatically
enhance your concentration and focus. Stand guard at the gates of your mind and be
so mentally tough that not even one negative thought enters your superbly
conditioned mind. Today, take Day 16’s mini-vacation and practise this serenity
technique every day for the next nine.
Part III: THE CHARACTER Brainstorming to Success
Take twenty minutes tonight and pull out your success journal. Jot down the first 25
things you want out of life. Anything you have ever dreamed of should be there. If it
is sailing to Hawaii, put it down. Now, using deep breathing and any one of the
relaxation strategies you have learned in this book (i.e., the mini-vacation is a good
one), get into a very relaxed state. Feel any tension and worrying thoughts leave your
mind like clouds moving out of a blue sky to make way for the radiant sunshine. Once
you feel serene, visualize yourself doing all the things you dreamed of and having all
the possessions you wrote down. Become aware of what you want, then act on the
dreams.
148
DAY 21 Date:_____________________________
Your Day Off! Enjoy the Rewards of MegaLiving!
Congratulations are due to you today! You have reached Day 21 of the MegaLiving!
Program and are on the golden road to a Perfect Life filled with pure joy, peak health,
happy relationships, excitement, success and contentment. You have powerfully
shown yourself what you can do and the potential within you to achieve your dreams.
By reaching Day 21, you are amongst a minority of people who have the discipline
to start and stay with this revolutionary personal excellence program for the long run.
Over the three weeks you have been practising MegaLiving!, changes have taken
place in every area of your life. You have looked at all of the aspects of your world and
taken positive steps to change what you don’t like. You have taken actions that will
pay huge dividends to you. New habits are starting to take root. New ideas about
what you will contribute to this world are dancing in your mind. You have more
energy, confidence and zest for life. In a word, you are “MegaLiving!”
You have worked hard to get to this stage of the program. It was not easy and you
have made some sacrifices. But you are here and you are outstanding! Today is your
day off. Do something adventurous, fun or silly. Be like a kid for the day, curious and
enthusiastic. Walk along the ocean or see that play you have missed. Before you dash
off to maximize your day off, quickly run through the brief assessment below to learn
where you stand with MegaLiving! and where you must place your focus to reach
your goals.
MegaLiving! Assessment
Good Very Good Excellent Outstanding
Mental Conditioning
Physical Conditioning
Character-Building
Motivation Level
Self-Happiness Rating
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life 149
150 MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
DAY 22 Date:_____________________________
Part I: THE MIND Don’t Believe in Defeat
Combine a powerful faith in the incredible abilities that lie deep inside of you with
guts, determination and enthusiasm and you will succeed in every challenge you
come up against. You should now be using the 5 Questions of Success that you
learned in Day 3 of the program. The first one is, of course, “How can I make today
a living Masterpiece?” To make each moment of every glorious day a masterpiece, it
is essential to have a tremendous belief in yourself and in the goals you have
committed yourself to realizing. Challenges and obstacles will appear, this is reality.
But you can turn them around. See them as opportunities and chances to grow and
develop further. Make problems a game. Ask what wisdom will you gain from them,
how will they make you stronger and tougher and what will happen if you allow them
to seep into your winning mindset. Believe in your unlimited potential. Believe in
your tremendous personal power. Believe in yourself.
Part II: THE BODY How to Take a Walk
Walking is excellent nutrition for the mind. It creates calmness, happiness and
wholeness. In this high-pressure world, we forget about the truly simple pleasure of a
long walk through the forest or a brisk walk along the waterfront. You may not have
access to posh country clubs, expensive golf resorts or private fitness facilities but you
can walk. The MegaLiving! Program has emphasized over and over the tremendous
importance of exercising daily. This should now be one of your life habits. The treat
of a walk on a regular basis should never be forgotten.
5 Suggestions on Taking Walks (a wonderful pleasure):
i) Find a lovely, natural place. Even the busiest city has one.
ii) Walk alone and at a quiet time of the day (early a.m. is great)
iii) Remove from your mind all worldly cares. Focus only on the walk
iv) Breath deeply and enjoy the air, scents, scenery and soulful quiet
v) Walk strongly, with good posture and balanced steps
Part III: THE CHARACTER 10 Golden Keys to Popularity
i) Remember people’s names. It is the sweetest sound they know.
ii) Smile often, laugh often. Know three great, clean jokes.
iii) Become a great listener. Use the 70/30 Rule. Listen 70% of the time,
talk only 30%.
iv) Perfect your manners. They are a mark of true polish and character.
v) Do small, kind gestures for people every day. Make every day count.
vi) Never say someone is wrong. Don’t argue. If you don’t agree, keep quiet.
vii) Inspire people, encourage people and befriend people.
viii) Develop your contacts. Write letters often and make phone calls.
ix) Be the most honest person you know.
x) Give more than you receive. It always comes back in a river.
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
DAY 23 Date:_____________________________
Part I: THE MIND More Memory Conditioning
You have learned that you have a photographic memory sleeping in your mind.
Details you thought had vanished have been retained and are awaiting the
conditioning of your memory. Tap its real potential.
The memory is like every other muscle, you must use it or lose it. Get into the habit
of using it. Stop making grocery lists, use you memory. Picture the ten items you need.
See yourself at the grocery store picking every one of the items up and inspecting
them. Make up a colorful, vivid story using the things you need so you will be certain
to get everything. Start memorizing a paragraph of poetry or literature every day. Turn
off that television set and spend a half hour on your greatest possession: your limitless
mind.
Part II: THE BODY More Exercising
The bountiful benefits of physical conditioning should be apparent. You have
enjoyed over three weeks of exercise and you must feel more energetic, confident and
healthy. Little digestive or skin problems which may have plagued you in the past
should have cleared up. Getting out of bed will be easier and your enthusiasm level
is skyrocketing. Today, increase the level of your exercise program. Work out longer,
run faster, swim harder. Do it! Do it! Do it!
Part III: THE CHARACTER Mastery of Problems
The MegaLiving! program has shown you that the quality of your life is the quality
of your interpretation of problems and challenges. The way you see events determines
your happiness and your level of success. Your attitude determines your altitude.
Once you have developed a winner’s mindset, nothing will stop you.
Problems will always crop up. The peak performer uses them as learning experiences
and motivators to work harder and accomplish more. One of the best strategies for
neutralizing the possible negative effects of problems is to ask yourself questions.
Asking yourself questions puts things into perspective, focuses your mind on the
positive elements of what has happened and prevents your energy from being drained
by worry.
A Secret for Mastering Life’s Problems Quickly
The next time you are faced with one of life’s little problems, on a piece of paper, ask
yourself the following questions:
i) How can this experience help me? What lesson have I learned?
ii) What will happen if I let this defeat me and if I worry?
iii) What can I do to ensure that this never happens again?
iv) What can I do to enjoy this situation and even laugh about it?
v) What am I grateful for?
151
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
DAY 24 Date:_____________________________
Part I: THE MIND Eliminating Your Fears Forever
Emerson said, “do the thing you fear and the death of fear is certain.” Lasting lifemastery
and personal success will only happen when you directly attack those
obstacles which may have held you back in the past. The first step is to eliminate your
fears once and for all.
The Master Blaster technique you learned earlier (Day 11) is an excellent tool to
blast fears out of your mind. Really, the technique is nothing more than simple
conditioning of the mind to enjoy the thing you were once afraid of or felt negative
towards. Today, make a list of the fears which have prevented you from being the best
you can be. The first stage is to be clearly aware of them, the second is to take
concrete action to eliminate them. Do you fear meeting people, public speaking,
making huge amounts of money, taking new risks or making important changes?
Note your fears. Then, under each one, make an action plan to face the very thing
you fear more often.
If you fear speaking, offer to give three presentations over the coming months to your
colleagues at work. Also, start reading every book you can get on public speaking.
Take a course on the subject and develop a burning desire to be the very best speaker
you know. Join Toastmasters and find some good role models who will gladly share
their secrets of success with you. Post pictures of Churchill and other powerful orators
over your bed and surround yourself with positive motivators which will guarantee
your success. Each time a fearful thought enters your mind, replace it immediately
and forcefully with a mental picture of you as a fiery, dynamic speaker. Work hard
over the next week to identify all of your other fears, no matter how small. Attack
them with a vengeance. You will be surprised how quickly they disappear.
Part II: THE BODY The Business of Living a Long Time
Throughout this program, your have received secrets to live longer and healthier.
The key is to really have a powerful belief in your personal vitality and understand
that you really are only as old as you think you are. Today, in a quiet moment, picture
yourself as you hope to be in 2, 10, 20 and 30 years. Drive home to yourself that your
body has incredible potential for youthfulness and vigor. Now that you are exercising,
eating more fruits and vegetables and less meat, relaxing your mind and body daily ,
thinking positively and living correctly, you are on the path to real longevity. Every
day, even for a minute, say to yourself, “I am youthful, dynamic and vital.” Visualize
yourself as energetic and young with a glowing complexion and a toned physique.
Everything is created twice - first in the mind and then outside of it.
Part III: THE CHARACTER Respect & Character
It has been said that knowledge will give you power but character will give you
respect. You have been exposed to some of the world’s most effective tools for
personal development in the MegaLiving! 30 Day Program for Life-Mastery. You
have the knowledge, now build your character. Each day for the past 23, you have
consistently taken steps to become more confident, motivated and vital. Make a
“strong as rock” character one of your most important goals. Set your goals and values
high and never shy away from them. Live a life of integrity and truth. Live with
passion and live honorably. Believe in yourself and your human potential!
152
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
DAY 25 Date:_____________________________
Part I: THE MIND Suggestive Articulation - More Mastery Mantras
Words undoubtedly have profound suggestive power. What we think and say all day
becomes our reality. You can develop great serenity by getting into a relaxed state and
repeating “tranquility” to yourself over and over. You can develop mental toughness
by quietly repeating “I am tough, I am powerful” to yourself all the way to work every
morning. Words influence the subconscious mind which is the seat of enormous
personal power. Never underestimate its abilities.
Today, rid yourself of all the little negative sayings you accidentally use throughout
the day. Stop saying “I’ve always been terrible with names” or, “I’ve never had much
energy in the morning.” If you make these kinds of harmful statements, you can bet
you will never remember names and always be groggy every morning. Sit and clearly
identify any phrases you regularly use which undermine your true potential for life
mastery. Get them out of your vocabulary.
Mastery Mantras
i) For Energy: “I am active and love to achieve.” Now take action today, be
alive!
ii) For Perfect Health: “I am incredibly healthy and vital, I feel so fit today.”
iii) For Wealth: “I am wealthy, I have real success.”
Part II: THE BODY Stress Reducer
After your workout today, treat yourself to a stress reducer. Book a professional
massage or give yourself one (see the technique from Day 4). Try an acupuncture
treatment or a sauna/whirlpool. Try anything new but give yourself a relaxing treat as
a reward for your excellent efforts at physical conditioning.
Part III: THE CHARACTER More Readings - Knowledge is Power
On Day 10, you were exposed to a number of books that should form the core of your
library of personal mastery books. Most of them are very inexpensive but actually of
priceless value. Today, read for one hour, at the very least, from Napoleon Hill’s superb
book Think and Grow Rich. This book will have a very great impact on you and put
you on the road to personal and financial abundance.
When you have finished your reading, take out your success journal and write down
Napoleon Hill’s 13 Principles. Study them and picture vividly how you could put
them to use in your life. Now set your goal as he suggests and take active steps to
make certain that you are on your way to achieving this dream. Over the next week,
finish the book and make notes on its key points so that you have them at your
fingertips.
153
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
DAY 26 Date:_____________________________
Part I: THE MIND Surround Yourself By Excellence
You have propelled yourself to a new level of focus and positivity. The key is to
ensure that every thought that enters your mind is a good and motivating one. To do
this, start listening to tapes of the great positive thinkers of this world such as
Reverend Norman Vincent Peale, read the books of Emerson and Carnegie, learn the
stories of those with much less than you who achieved life mastery. Stop wasting time
thinking about what is missing in your life and start dreaming and achieving your
ultimate goals.
Also, surround yourself with other triggers for happiness in your life. When you wake
up, play some soulful jazz or serenely pleasant classical music. Associate with only
those who are inspired by life and who refuse to accept anything but the very best
that this dazzling world has to offer. Keep adding to your success library, go to
seminars on mastery of your character, life and virtues. Live by the Kaizen principle
of daily and constant improvement. Make this your personal trademark.
Part II: THE BODY Fasting For Health and Energy
For thousands of years, people have fasted. Going without food for a day or at least
restricting your diet to fruits and juices for a day will cleanse your system, give you
more energy and significantly increase your self-control. It is a technique to try once
every month for general health maintenance. Consult your physician if you have a
health concern prior to fasting.
Today, plan to fast for one day over the next two weeks. Schedule this and stick to
your commitment. Your discipline muscles are getting stronger and stronger every
day. Keep it up, self-control does wonders for your life!
Part III: THE CHARACTER The Wonders of Listening
One of the most essential qualities of an outstanding individual is the ability to listen
to others intently. In our fast-paced, egocentric world, we are often too self-centered
to take the time to listen to others, even those we love the most. But once we start
listening to those we are surrounded by, we learn things we never knew before. People
who once appeared boring suddenly have valuable insights from which you can learn
and grow. As well, once you start developing the powerful listening habit, your
relationships improve. You start to see the point of view of others and develop more
compassion and understanding. People start enjoying your company even more and
your personal contacts dramatically increase. The art of listening must be cultivated.
Here are some strategies to become the best listener you know:
i) Stop talking so much. Use your self-control to start listening more today.
ii) Visualize being the world’s best listener. In the morning, focus for a
couple of minutes on your excellent ability to listen and how you plan to
use this skill in your meetings today.
iii) Stop interrupting others. We all do it. Start a game and pay your friends
or family members a dollar each time you cut them off.
154
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
DAY 27 Date:_____________________________
Part I: THE MIND The Magic of Silence
This is a fast-paced world we live in. We can thrive on the chaos by developing
strategies to ensure that we remain the calm within the eye of the storm. The habit
of inner serenity is tremendously important for personal excellence. This morning,
appreciate the power of silence. Silence provides a tonic for even the most anxious
mind and returns one to a state of tranquility. Take half an hour out of your morning
schedule and sit in the quietest place in your home. Now focus on the silence,
enjoying the peace. You will feel like getting up and doing something after only a few
minutes but muster up all the self-control you have developed through this program
and resist the urge. Simply be still. Listen to your heartbeat or feel the weight of your
head on your shoulders. You will start to notice things you have never seen before
when you are silent and internally still. Make the enjoyment of silence an integral
part of your life routine.
Part II: THE BODY Making Exercise a Delight
Former President Ronald Reagan once stated one of the true keys to success in
physical conditioning: “find something you enjoy and keep the exercise varied.” You
have been doing something physically challenging for the past 26 days of the
MegaLiving! program. You have taken your energy levels and conditioning to a much
higher level and are starting to see positive changes in all areas of your life. Do not
let boredom set in. Be adventurous with your exercise program. Try a new sport today
or find the three activities you enjoy the most and alternate between each of those
over the course of a week. Keep exercising hard and maintain your discipline. But
above all else, have a blast!
Part III: THE CHARACTER More Life Tips
i) Never discuss private or business matters inside elevators. You might be
surprised who is standing next to you.
ii) Set aside at least one night every week to be alone with your spouse. Turn
off the TV and leave the answering machine on. Focus all your attention
on your life partner. Really talk and enjoy the company of this very special
person.
iii) Experiment with new ideas. Try using an electronic scheduler or tool to see
if it provides greater efficiency. Never stop improving. Stay hungry for new
ideas.
iv) Keep your perspective - always. Things are never as bad as they might
seem. Even the worst moments will pass. Challenges allow one to grow and
become tougher.
v) Do not make enemies.
vi) Never take your family for granted. Think for a moment about how you
would feel if your mother or father were no longer here. What thoughts
have you forgotten to express, what loving gestures would you have
performed? Now pick up the phone and tell these things to those you love.
155
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
DAY 28 Date:_____________________________
Part I: THE MIND Your Standards of Excellence
In Day 20, you were exposed to the 5 Master Keys to making excellence your
standard for life. Review them and make sure you are indeed applying them to every
aspect of your life. Happiness does not come from relaxing and doing nothing.
Happiness only comes from achieving and knowing that every day of your life you are
getting better and better. Raise your standards and expect nothing but the very best
from yourself. Life mastery is not for a chosen few. Slumbering deep inside you are
powers and abilities that you cannot fathom. The leaders and achievers of the world
all know this. Keep your aim high. Push yourself when you feel scared or lacking in
motivation. Soon excellence will be your habit. Aiming to the sky will be second
nature to you.
Part II: THE BODY More Voice Conditioning
On Day 5, a secret of longevity was shared with you: voice conditioning creates
health. Practice the following exercises to further strengthen your voice:
i) Pronounce the following syllables as quickly and in as low a tone as
possible: pe be me fe ve le re; ip ib iv if
ii) Sustain “humm” for as long as you can. Repeat five times.
iii) Say “haa” five times, each time exhaling deeply and releasing any tension
that has built up inside your body.
Part III: THE CHARACTER Run Your Own Race
One of the essential principles of life success and true personal mastery is to run your
own race. Too often one gets caught up in what others are doing and what other
people expect. “Why haven’t you bought a house or started a family yet?” your lovely
mother might ask. “You are too old to go to law school” your best friend might say.
Set your goals, know what you want out of life and then plan methodically to take
action on the path of your dreams. If you really know where you are going and
cultivate the important habit of faith in yourself, what others say or think will mean
very little to you.
You are like a ship that has plotted its course. You know precisely the route on which
you are travelling and the courses of other vessels are irrelevant. Running your own
race also leads to peace of mind and self-confidence. If your school chum lands an
early vice-presidency, you are genuinely thrilled for him because you are certain that
you too will achieve your own goals in time. Pettiness vanishes and kindness towards
others becomes one of your most notable personal traits.
156
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
DAY 29 Date:_____________________________
Part I: THE MIND Concentration Revisited
This program has continually emphasized the importance of concentration in life
mastery. Developing powerful concentration skills allows you to control the thoughts
in your mind. Negative thoughts can then be banished and positive ones will prevail.
As a positive and motivated thinker, you will then have the desire and energy to
achieve all that you are capable of achieving. If there is one secret to remember for
the rest of your life, remember that true happiness and peace of mind can be
developed. You can achieve the state of Bliss by mastering the art of concentration.
Today, go back to Day 2 of the MegaLiving! program and practise the Burning
Candle exercise for at least 25 minutes. You have been practising your concentration
exercises over the past few weeks and should be noticing dramatic improvements in
this area. No longer will your mind wander at the slightest distraction. No longer will
you become annoyed at the most trivial of events. You no longer major in minor
things and now focus only on the very best in life.
Part II: THE BODY Food For Thought
It is now beyond debate that what you put into your body affects your mind. Eat too
much meat and other hard-to-digest foods and you will feel lazy and less alert. Eat
light foods such as vegetables and fresh fruits and you will soon have boundless energy
and will be startlingly attentive and mentally agile. Moods are even affected by some
foods. The essential point is to strictly monitor what goes in so your mind is given the
very best fuel it deserves.
Make a list of all the food you have ingested over the past twenty-four hours. Now
remove as much of the fatty foods as possible. Try replacing chocolate bars and snack
foods with fresh fruit or yogurt. Cut down your red meat intake as much as you can
as this food is exceptionally hard to digest and absorbs an undue amount of your
energy. Once you precisely identify what you are eating, you can take steps to
improve the quality of your food and the quality of your physical life.
Part III: THE CHARACTER The Importance of the Mastermind
The Mastermind is a term that has been used in business circles to describe a group
of people assembled to motivate one another, to brainstorm for new ideas and to
support each other as each participant tries new ventures. You have clearly
committed yourself to self-mastery and achieving all you can. By getting to Day 29 of
the 30 day MegaLiving! program you have demonstrated your discipline and
enthusiasm for success in life. Today, plan your own Personal Mastery Mastermind.
Think of the four most positive people you know, people who live with zest and are
determined to enjoy their dreams, people who are open to new ideas and who you
can trust. Discuss the Mastermind concept with them and plan to meet at least once
every two weeks. At these meetings, brainstorm for ideas on personal excellence
techniques, ways to live with more passion, tools for time management and financial
success. Motivate one another and use the powers of synergy to catapult you to results
you have never seen before. The Personal Mastery Mastermind is one of the most
effective resources you will ever have to start and continue MegaLiving!
157
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
DAY 30 Date:_____________________________
The Conclusion of MegaLiving!
The Ultimate Action - Plan for Mastery of Your Mind, Body and Character
Congratulations on successfully completing the 30 Day Program for Life Mastery. You
have been exposed to the finest strategies from both the East and the West for
personal excellence and lifelong success. Thousands have applied these strategies and
have gone on to find enormous personal wealth, true peace of mind and ideal health.
You will now be able to put far more living in your life.
This, the final day of the MegaLiving! program, is not the end but really the start of
a new way of life for you. Over the past 30 days, you have learned exceptionally
powerful principles and exercises to control the way you think and feel. You should
be feeling more motivated, energized and disciplined than you have felt in the past.
In this book are the secrets for lifelong success and happiness. Practise the skills and
share them with others. Do not stop using the program but, rather, make it an
essential part of your life. An elite athlete does not stop conditioning after the first
race is over but maintains a training regimen over many years until it is second
nature. MegaLiving! should be a way of life for you too. Every day you will improve
in some way and find a new sparkle of joy and fun. Happiness is truly not a
destination but a method of travelling through this wonderful world.
You have devoted much time to excelling with this program and you have made
sacrifices along the way. You are now equipped to achieve the dreams you have held
close to your heart. Believe in yourself and your potential. Shatter any limitations and
appreciate that any challenge can indeed be overcome.
Dream higher than you have ever dreamt before. Aim for the stars. I wish you well
and hope that we can one day meet on this path of success that we share. This path
is supremely exciting, filled with magnificent gifts and is open to everyone.
This path is called MegaLiving!
Robin S. Sharma
158
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
The MegaLiving! SuccessLog
Every day, in every way, I am getting better and better.
Emile Coue
159
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
A
The Mind
B
The Body
C
The Character
Days of
the
Program
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
MegaLiving! Notes & Progress
160
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
MegaLiving! Notes & Progress
161
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
MegaLiving! Notes & Progress
162
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
MegaLiving! Notes & Progress
163
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
MegaLiving! Notes & Progress
164
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
About The Author
Robin S. Sharma, LL.B., LL.M., is an internationally respected
authority on motivation, leadership and peak performance. By
blending Western strategies for personal effectiveness and change with
timeless principles of the East for lifelong success, he has helped
thousands of people enhance the quality of their lives.
Over ten years ago, Robin Sharma set out to find the most effective
strategies for dynamic living. With few resources but a commitment to
learning and self-improvement, he travelled extensively searching for
philosophies, techniques and skills that anyone could apply easily to
profoundly improve the quality of their personal and professional lives.
He distilled much of the timeless literature on character-building and
successful living and learned the secrets of hundreds and hundreds of
people including leaders in the world of high finance, wildly successful
entrepreneurs, yogis living high in the Himalayan mountains of India,
sages of the East and everyday people who had found ways to live with
deep contentment. He then tested the principles he learned in his own
life.
Robin Sharma has Bachelor of Law and Master of Law degrees from
Dalhousie Law School, Canada’s oldest law school. He made
Canadian legal history in being selected as the first Judicial Law Clerk
to the Nova Scotia Supreme Court, Appeal Division. He was later
named a Foundation Scholar and went on to become a highly
successful litigation lawyer. He is also a triathlete, a practitioner of the
ancient martial art of Tae Kwon Do, a musician and a dedicated family
man.
Robin Sharma is a frequent guest on national TV and radio shows. His
philosophy on life mastery has been featured in the international press
and he is a highly-sought after speaker. He lives in Toronto, Canada
with his wife and son.
To schedule a Keynote Speech or a Seminar with Robin S. Sharma,
please call the Haunsla Corporation at (416) 963-8990.
Internet: megalive@inforamp.net
165
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
Seminars, Tapes and Free Newsletter
The MegaLiving!™ Seminar:
The 7 Secrets of Life Mastery™
This seminar, primarily for corporations and associations, is led by Robin S.
Sharma and concentrates on the 7 essential strategies for personal
effectiveness, self-renewal and peak performance. It is offered throughout
Canada, the United States and Asia. Robin S. Sharma is a much sought-after
speaker for keynotes, in-house training sessions and seminars for a wide
variety of groups. All presentations can be tailored to suit your needs.
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life:
Audio Learning Program
($14.95 plus $4 S&H)
Recorded live at one of Robin S. Sharma’s acclaimed seminars, this audio
cassette offers you an opportunity to learn the 7 Secrets of Life Mastery along
with easy to apply techniques that you can use today to develop peace of
mind, ideal health and the habits of peak performers. These include effective
time management, the power of goal-setting and powerful tools to build
discipline and will-power. You will also learn how to live with more
satisfaction, enthusiasm and vitality.
The MegaLiving! Peak Performance Report™
(Free Newsletter)
This newsletter, published quarterly, will keep you inspired and motivated to
continue to excel personally and professionally. It is packed with practical tips
and strategies that you will benefit from immediately and includes regular
articles on mental mastery, character-building, time management, personal
renewal, stress reduction, relationships and maintaining peak health. To
receive this report simply call us.
To order or receive more information, please call us:
THE HAUNSLA CORPORATION
7B Pleasant Blvd., Suite 957,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada, M4T 1K2
Telephone: (416) 963-8990
Internet: megalive@inforamp.net
166
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
MegaLiving!™
30 Days to a Perfect Life
Would someone you know benefit from reading MegaLiving? It has
proved to be the ideal gift for business people, students, athletes and
anyone seeking more personal and professional success.
Please rush me _______ copies of MegaLiving! at $14.97 (Cdn.)
each, including shipping. On US orders, total investment is
$12.95 (US) per copy.
I am enclosing a cheque/money order payable to
The Haunsla Corporation in the amount of $ __________.
NAME & ADDRESS IN BLOCK LETTERS PLEASE
Name
Address City
Prov/State Code
Telephone Number
Facsimile Number
On orders for 10 or more books, we offer a discount.
Please call us at (416) 963-8990 or write to us for more information.
THE HAUNSLA CORPORATION
7B Pleasant Boulevard, Suite 957
Toronto, Ontario,
Canada M4T 1K2
Internet: megalive@inforamp.net
Kindly allow four to six weeks for delivery
167
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
ABOUT THE AUTHOR
Robin S. Sharma, LL.B., LL.M., is an internationally recognized
expert on motivation, leadership and peak performance. He is also a
highly successful litigation lawyer. By blending Western strategies for
personal effectiveness and change with timeless principles of the East
for lifelong success, he has helped thousands of people enhance the
quality of their lives. He holds Bachelor and Master of Law degrees
from Dalhousie Law School and is a highly sought-after speaker. A
frequent guest on national TV and radio shows, Robin Sharma lives in
Toronto, with his wife and son.
168
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life 169
170 MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life 171
172 MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life 173
174 MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life 175
176 MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life 177
178 MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life 179
180 MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life 181
182 MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life 183
184 MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life