truth. She had the perfect workshop. The best tools. And the most
magnificent diamonds imaginable.
Maria hitched her hip onto a stool, pulled a pad and pencil
toward her and began to sketch. Yes, she thought as she lost
herself in the work she loved, she could make her design even
more pleasing to the eye. And thinking about diamonds was far
SANDRA MARTON 91
safer than thinking about the man to whom she’d all but sold
herself. The man who would claim her later tonight, who would
take her to his bed, make love to her as he had all those weeks
ago. She would hold back, hold back…but, in the end, she knew
she would sob his name, open her mouth, her body to his. She
would be lost in his arms, in his strength and beauty and passion.
She forced the treacherous thoughts from her mind, put all her
energy into her ideas for the necklace and the diamonds. They,
at least, would never hurt her.
The sun shifted in the sky. She never noticed. She sketched,
erased, sketched… And yawned. Yawned again. She was tired
all the time lately. This time, at least there was a reason. It had
to be jet lag, catching up to her.
As she had done many times over the last couple of weeks,
Maria set her work aside, folded her arms on the table, lowered
her head and rested her cheek on them.
Just a few seconds, to clear the cobwebs from her brain, she
thought. Just a few seconds…
Jet lag, Alex kept telling himself. That was why he felt so
damned irritable.
Besides, it was unreasonable for his father to have demanded
a meeting now, but that was Aegeus’s way. What the king wished,
others must do. And today, this very afternoon, what Aegeus
wished was to meet with his three sons and discuss plans for the
construction of another high-rise complex in Ellos.
There was no point to such a discussion.
For one thing, the construction was already underway. For
another, Alex was in charge of the project. He had taken over development
on Aristo more than eight years ago, with Aegeus’s
grudging blessing.
“You might as well get some use out of that MBA of yours,”
he’d said, which was as close as he’d ever come to acknowledging
that his second son was now more qualified than he to oversee
the kingdom’s booming economy.
This meetingwas just a not so subtle reminder thatAegeuswas
92 BILLIONAIRE PRINCE, PREGNANT MISTRESS
still Aegeus, Alex thought as he sat at the conference table in the
king’s palace office. As if any of them could ever forget that.
“…twenty stories, Alexandros, but why not thirty?”
Alex looked up from the doodles he’d been making on the
yellow notepad before him. Aegeus’s eyes were focused on him.
His younger brother, Andreas, seated beside him, nudged Alex’s
foot with his under the table. His older brother, Sebastian, seated
opposite, raised his eyebrows.
“Didn’t you say the architect agrees that twenty stories for the
center building would be right, Alex?” he said smoothly.
“Yes,” Andreas chimed in, “twenty stories so that the view of
the harbor would not be blocked from the condominium complex
on the heights, right, Alex?”
“That’s correct,” Alex replied. Sebastian grinned. You owe us,
big time, that grin said. Well, hell. That was how it had always
been, the three brothers bailing each other out of hot water when
their father turned a stern eye on any one of them.
Aegeus looked grim, but then he looked that way most of the
time. He looked tired, too, Alex noticed, and thinner than usual.
“Are you feeling all right, Father?” he said.
The king’s eyes narrowed. “I’m feeling fine, thank you,” he
said brusquely. “Fine enough to ask a few more questions—that
is, if you can manage to keep your attention on our discussion a
bit longer.”
Alex felt a muscle knot in his jaw. “What else do you want to
know, Father?”
“Have you settled the woman in?”
“Excuse me?”
“The woman. Mary Santos. Is she settled in?”
“Her name is Maria,” Alex said carefully. “And I thought we
were talking about the Ellos convention center.”
“We were. Now we’re talking about the person who’ll make
your mother’s gift. What is she like?”
“She is, ah, she is talented.”
Talented, indeed.
“I assumed that,” his father said impatiently. “But what is she
SANDRA MARTON 93
like? I am to meet her tonight, at dinner.Will she be able to carry
on a conversation with some intelligence, or is she one of those
leftover flower children who walks around barefoot?”
Sebastian coughed. Andreas cleared his throat. Alex shot them
both looks that promised trouble when they were alone.
“She’s a designer, Father,” he said carefully. “A New Yorker.
I’m sure you’ll find her interesting and able to hold her own at
the dinner table.”
And more than able to hold her own everywhere else. In bed,
for instance, where he should have been with her, right now.
“I assume you’ve put her in a suite at The Grand Hotel.”
“No.” Alex hesitated. “I, ah, I decided to keep her at my house
at Apollonia.”
His father stared at him. So did his brothers. Damn it, Alex
thought, and felt heat rise in his face.
“Security,” he said quickly. “She’ll be working with a fortune
in diamonds.”
“Have we security problems at The Grand?”
“No, of course not. But there are so many tourists…”
“Tourists who pay a thousand Euros a night for a room are
not tourists likely to dabble in theft,” Aegeus said, his words
heavy with sarcasm.
There was a moment’s silence. Then Sebastian and Andreas
spoke at the same time.
“You can never be too sure,” Andreas said.
“Remember that incident in—where was it, Alex? Some hotel
in Manhattan?”
His brothers had redeemed themselves. “Exactly,” Alex
said. “Security is much better at my place. The gates. The
electronics. The guards. I had my guesthouse converted into a
workshop for her.”
Aegeus nodded. “Well. Well, yes. Good thinking.”
A compliment. Something rare. Of course, it was a compliment
given in response to a lie. He’d placed Maria in his home
for reasons that didn’t have a thing to do with anything but lust.
He liked women. He liked sex. He knew what desire was,
94 BILLIONAIRE PRINCE, PREGNANT MISTRESS
how anticipation could enhance the moment when a man finally
took a woman.
But he’d never behaved like this.
Demanding Maria’s compliance. Damned near forcing her to
agree to sleep with him. It had made sense, when he’d planned
it. He would use her for his own ends as she had used him—
If that was true, why was his body in this almost constant state
of arousal? He’d spent the last hours thinking about her.
Imagining her waiting for his arrival. Imagining what he would
do when he reached home.
The images, hot and raw, flooded his mind. If he didn’t do
something soon, he was going to explode.
“Alex? Are you listening to me? I said—”
“Father.” Alex pushed back his chair and got to his feet. “I’m
sorry, but I have to leave.”
Aegeus looked at him in disbelief. “You what?”
“I said I have to—”
“We have not finished discussing the convention center.”
“We finished discussing it three months ago,”Alex said crisply.
His father glared at him. “I don’t like your tone.”
“My apologies, Father. I’m exhausted, that’s all. I’ve flown
to New York and back in, what, less than twenty-four hours.”
He forced a smile. “Perhaps we can put off this conversation
until tomorrow.”
Aegeus studied his middle son, then nodded.
“Very well.” He rose from his chair. Sebastian and Andreas
immediately did the same. “Be prompt for dinner tonight, please.
All of you. Alex, tell Ms. Santos your mother and I look forward
to meeting her.”
Alex started toward the door. The king called after him.
“Alex? My initial concern about this woman, on reading her
proposal, was that she was too young and inexperienced. Now
that you’ve spent a bit of time with her, what do you think? How
does she strike you?”
Spectacularly beautiful. And spectacularly immoral. And,
Thee mou, so desirable he ached to possess her.
SANDRA MARTON 95
“I told you,” Alex said calmly. “She’s very interesting.”
Then he got the hell out of there before his father or, worse,
his brothers could ask him any more questions.
The drive home seemed to last an eternity, even though he was
at the wheel of his Ferrari and took both the highway and then
the winding road to the house at breakneck speed.
Would she be waiting for him? He’d told her to be ready by
six; he was an hour early. She might be in the bath. Or undressing,
baring her flesh to the waning afternoon light.
Such schoolboy fantasies, and completely demolished
when Athenia told him Keeria Santos was in the guesthouse.
In the workshop.
The workshop, he thought as he strode down the path to it.
Of course. The only allegiance, the only honesty she had was
to her work.
It filled him with a rage he knew had no basis in reality.
She should have been in the house. In his bedroom. Dressing
for dinner, as he’d told her to. Or waiting for him. For his touch.
For the act thatwould avenge what she had done to him weeks ago.
“Maria,” he barked as he flung open the guesthouse door.
“Maria, I told you…”
Andhe sawher.At theworkbench. Her head on her arms.Asleep.
His anger drained away. He felt something new take its place,
something he could not name and he swallowed hard, closed the
door quietly and stoodwatching her. Then, slowly, hewalked to her.
Her head was turned to the side. Her lashes formed dark crescents
against the high arc of her cheekbones; there were purple
smudges of exhaustion under her eyes.
My fault, he thought. He had walked into her life…hell, he
had bullied his way into her life, then dragged her halfway around
the world. Not that he owed her more delicate treatment. It was
just that she looked so innocent in her sleep. Her lustrous hair,
lying tumbled over one shoulder. Her translucent skin. Her lips,
delicately curved.
He could remember their taste.
96 BILLIONAIRE PRINCE, PREGNANT MISTRESS
Not from that last kiss he’d given her hours ago, a kiss given
in rage. He remembered her taste from that night in Ellos. How
her mouth had trembled beneath his. How her sigh of surrender
had mingled with his breath. How he had groaned at the sweetness
of her.
He didn’t think. Didn’t question. Instead, he bent down,
brushed a soft, silken curl from her cheek. Put his lips to her
temple. The pink shell of her ear. The curve of her jaw.
“Maria.” Her name was a whisper. “Maria,” he said again, and
when she sighed, he squatted beside her and pressed his lips
gently to hers.
Her lashes fluttered.
He kissed her again. Her taste was honeyed. Don’t, he
thought, don’t. But what could be wrong with one more kiss?
One more sip of nectar from her soft, rosy mouth? Just one last
brush of his lips against hers. Just one… And this time, her lips
parted to his. Clung lightly to his. Her eyes opened; her pupils
were huge and dark.
“Alexandros?” she whispered, and he was lost.
Groaning, he scooped her into his arms. Brought her down
on the soft Kilim carpet. Swept his hands into her hair, lifted her
lovely face to his, and took possession of her mouth.
“Alexandros,” she sighed.
His name. Not any other man’s. His. Only his, and now her
arms were around his neck, her mouth was moving on his as he
lay her back and came down beside her.
His hands cupped her face. Her beauty stole his breath; the
smile that trembled on her lips pierced his heart.
“Yes,” he said huskily. “That’s right, glyka mou. Saymyname.”
She did, again and again until he silenced her with a deep,
hungry kiss. A cry rose in her throat. Her arms tightened around
him. Her back arched; she rose against him and he groaned again
and slipped his hand inside her black tights.
Her flesh was warm. Soft. Fragrant with the glorious scent
of arousal.
He could feel the race of his blood.
SANDRA MARTON 97
He put his lips to her throat.
She sobbed his name. Cupped the back of his head. Urged his
mouth down, down, to the uptilted thrust of her breast. To the
pebbled nipple that pressed against the softness of her sweater.
He caught the bud lightly between his teeth. Her cry pierced the
thick silence.
“Yes,” she said, “yes, yes…”
He pushed up the sweater. Sucked a nipple into his mouth. She
was lifting herself to him, burying her fingers in his hair, urging
him closer, closer…
A knock, as strident as Olympian thunder, sounded at the
door. Alex barely heard it but Maria stiffened in his arms.
“Alex,” she hissed.
“Shh, agapi mou. Never mind.Whoever is there will go away.”
The knock came again. “Your Highness?” Athenia’s voice
was thin and apologetic. “Your mother is on the phone. She asks
if you and Keeria Santos would come by a few minutes early.”
Alex pressed his forehead to Maria’s. “Yes,” he called, “all
right. Tell the queen we’ll be there as soon as we can.” He waited
until he was sure the housekeeper was gone. Until he could move
without disgracing himself. Then he sat up. “We’ll finish this
later,” he started to say, but Maria had already rolled away from
him and risen to her feet. Her face was white except for two spots
of crimson high on her cheeks.
“Is that how you get your women, Your Highness? By taking
advantage of them when they’re asleep?”
Her voice shook with indignation. Hell, he was shaking, too,
but with thwarted desire.
“You know that isn’t how it was.”
“What I know,” she said, the words laced with accusation, “is
that I woke up and found you all over me!”
He stood and faced her, caught between equal parts of anger
and frustration.
“Liar,” he said in a low voice.
She turned her back. He grasped her shoulder and swung her
toward him.
98 BILLIONAIRE PRINCE, PREGNANT MISTRESS
“What’s the matter, glyka mou? Don’t you like it when the
tables are turned? When you’re not in control of the situation?”
“All right,” she snapped. “You made your point. You—you got
me to—to give in to you. Are you satisfied now?”
He gave a sharp, ugly laugh. “We have a long way to go until
I’m satisfied, sweetheart.”
The crimson drained from her face. “How can you do this?”
It was, he thought, an excellent question.
Despite everything, he was not a man who would ever take
an unwilling woman to bed. That was part of the problem, when
he came down to it. Maria said she didn’t want him but each time
he took her in his arms, she turned that into a lie. Or did she?
Was she still playing him? Was she using him now, even as
he was determined to use her? And how could he tell himself that
was what he was doing when the truth was he had never wanted
a woman as he wanted her and—be honest, Karedes—and
revenge or payback, whatever name he gave his supposed motivation,
had zero to do with what he felt once she was in his arms.
He turned away from her. Ran his hand through his thick, dark
hair.
He was a man who had always prided himself on logic. On
self-discipline. And right now, hell, who was he kidding? Ever
since the night he’d first met this woman, logic and self-discipline
had gone by the wayside.
Maybe it was enough to admit that he wanted her still, and
that at the end of a month she would be out of his system.
Damned right, she would, he thought grimly, and he turned and
faced her again.
“I suggest you return to the house,” he said brusquely. “One
of the maids has unpacked your suitcase. You have—” He
glanced at his watch. “You have twenty minutes to get ready and
then we leave for the palace.”
Her chin came up. “Where has your devoted slave put my
things?”
Thee mou, she enraged him! He wanted to shake her. Or strip
her naked and show her who was in charge here.
SANDRA MARTON 99
100 BILLIONAIRE PRINCE, PREGNANT MISTRESS
“Your clothes are where they belong,” he snapped. “In my
room. We have an agreement, Ms. Santos, that says you are to
fulfill your required duties in their entirety, or have you conveniently
forgotten that?”
She gave him a withering look. “How could I forget what is
sure to be the worst agreement of my life?”
It was, Maria thought, a fine line.
But the Prince of Arrogance only laughed, and that was the
sound that followed her all the way to the house.
CHAPTER EIGHT
WHAT did you wear to dine with royalty?
Probably nothing she’d packed, Maria thought unhappily as
she followed Athenia to Alex’s bedroom.
Bedroom? Could you call a room this size a bedroom? It was
bigger than her loft. Polished wood floors. Handmade rugs. A
cathedral ceiling. Skylights. A wall of glass and, beyond it, a
terrace and the pool that seemed to hang suspended over the bay.
And a bed.
A bed centered beneath the skylights, elevated on a raised
platform, covered by a black silk comforter and a sea of black
and white pillows as if it were a stage set.
“Madam will find her things hung in the dressing room.”
Maria swung toward Athenia. “Yes. I—I— Thank you.”
“Everything has been pressed, keeria, to your liking, I hope.”
“Thank you,” she said again. They seemed the only words she
could manage.
The housekeeper smiled politely and shut the door behind her.
Maria waited a couple of seconds, then turned the lock. She
leaned back against the door, shut her eyes and inhaled deeply.
It was a handsome room. Hell, it was a magnificent room.
And that bed…
Do not look at that bed, Maria. Do not even think about it.
She would not. She would shower and dress. She had twenty
minutes. Not much time, but enough. Actually, she never took
102 BILLIONAIRE PRINCE, PREGNANT MISTRESS
longer than that to get ready for a date. Except, thiswasn’t a date.
It was business. Business to be conducted at a palace.
She’d seen the palace—from the outside, anyway—the last
time she was here.
It made Buckingham Palace look small.
“That’s it,” she whispered.“Work yourself into a panic. That’s
going to be a huge help!” Spine straight, she ignored the bed and
marched across the room. This was an important night.
Indeed, it was. At the end of it, Alex was going to make love
to her.
Maria rolled her eyes. Itwas stupid to let her thoughtswander.
Of course, tonightwas important. She had the commission; now,
she had to make sure she had the hearts and minds of her clients.
Her clients. The king of Aristo and his queen. She’d come a
long way from the phony Frenchman of L’Orangerie.
The dressing room made her laugh. Add some plumbing and
most Manhattan residents would have happily called it an apartment.
And there were her things, on a rack all by themselves, surrounded
by other racks filled with men’s clothes. Alex’s clothes.
And no, she was not going to think about that now. Dinner
was everything. It had to go well.
Her clothes, as Athenia had told her, had been pressed, hung
and organized by color. Giddy laughter rose in her throat. Jeans
and jeans and jeans, T-shirts and blouses and sweaters. Organized
and pressed, and what in hell was there hanging in front of her
she could wear to a palace?
Casual, Alex had said. Easy for him to say. And to do.
What was he going to wear? And where would he shower and
dress?
Not here, and that was all that mattered. For all she knew, he
kept a complete wardrobe in each bedroom. A mistress in each,
too. Or maybe this was the way installing a new mistress was
handled. Maybe his staff was trained to move some of the
master’s clothes, just enough to get his latest conquest through
the confusion of her first night here.
Stop it, Maria thought furiously.
SANDRA MARTON 103
She was most assuredly not Alex’s conquest, she was his—
What would be the correct word? Never mind. She would not
dwell on how or why she was in his bedroom, or the implications
of it, either—or on the fact that his entire staff surely now
understood she would be sleeping with him.
A dozen other women probably had gone this route. She
lacked their experience in the art or business of being a kept
woman but instinct told her that a woman who filled that role
would not blush at such information being public.
She’d do her best not to blush, either.
Besides, Alex would not ‘keep’ her. The money for the commission
didn’t come from him. It was for the design and execution
of the queen’s birthday gift, and she would not accept so
much as a penny for anything else.
A phone rang.
Maria looked around. There it was. A small white telephone
on the wall of the dressing room. It rang again and she plucked
it from its cradle, put it to her ear and said a careful, “Hello?”
“You’re down to twelve minutes, glyka mou.”
“Alexandros?”
“I like it when you call me that.”
His voice was husky. Why did that roughness always send a
tingle along her skin?
“Alexandros!” She looked around wildly. “Where are you?”
He laughed. “Relax, sweetheart. I can’t see you—but I
know exactly what you’re doing.You’re standing in the middle
of my bedroom, trying not to look at the bed and wondering
what on earth possessed you to bring nothing suitable to wear
this evening.”
She blinked. “Wrong,” she said airily. After all, she was in the
dressing room, not the bedroom, and she’d already wasted time
trying not to look at the bed.
“Try the emerald silk dress and the black stiletto sandals.
And before you tell me you won’t wear another woman’s castoffs,
let me assure you they aren’t. The dress and shoes were
both delivered from the Chanel boutique in Ellos a couple of
hours before we arrived.” His words took on that same sexy
softness again. “I had to guess at the size, glyka mou, so I hope
I got them right. Of course, we won’t have any such difficulties
after tonight.”
Maria felt her entire body blush as she slammed the phone
back onto its cradle. How dared he buy her clothes? Did he really
think she’d wear anything he’d paid for?
There it was. The dress. And right below it, the shoes. Both
were gorgeous. The brilliant color of the dress would be perfect
with the delicately spiked heels. Exactly what she’d have bought
for an occasion like this…if she’d been in a position to spend,
what, ten thousand bucks?
She would not wear these things.
She would wear something of her own.
Black jeans. A white silk blouse. Dressy enough for dinner at
an upscale New York restaurant…but for dinner at a palace? For
what was, basically, a business meeting that was surely going to
change her life?
“Damn you, Alexandros,” she said bitterly—and knew she
had lost Round One.
She showered quickly, and never mind that the faint, clean scent
of the hand-milled soap reminded her of Alex. The shampoo had
the same effect. So what? Soap was soap, shampoo was
shampoo. She towel-dried her hair—no time for anything else—
and hurried into the dressing room.
There were more than shoes with the dress. There was a tiny
black evening purse. And undies.A black lace bra.A black lace
thong. The sheerest thigh-high nylons she’d ever seen.
She had her own underwear.
But not like this.
To hell with it.
She put on the bits of black lace, the sheer stockings. Hair loose
or up? Maria peered into the mirror. Up. The mass of dark strands
was too damp, too wild, too curly to leave loose. Finally, she
slipped on the emerald silk dress. Stepped into the black sandals.
104 BILLIONAIRE PRINCE, PREGNANT MISTRESS
And saw herself in the mirror.
He had good taste, the Prince of Arrogance, she thought wryly.
Acareer as a personal shopper could be his in the blink of an eye.
The dress was a perfect fit, demure and businesslike even as
it made the most of her slender figure. The shoes were gorgeous.
Straps that wound around her foot. Stiletto heels as thin as the
blade for which they were named.
Could he possibly know shoes were her weakness?
No, she thought. The better probability was that they were his
weakness. Maybe later tonight, he’d want her in the stilettos and
nothing besides the black lace thong…
“Oh God,” she whispered, and felt her heart rate shoot into
the stratosphere.
Jewelry, she thought numbly, because it was safer to think
about that than about what happened to her body each time she
imagined being in this room, in that bed, with the gorgeous
Alexandros. How could you hate a man and still want him?
A question for another time, not for the one minute—the one
minute she had left!
Fortunately, she’d dumped a couple of pieces of her stuff into
her handbag. A twisted gold chain? No. A shorter one, intricately
braided? No. A slender gold rope with a hunk of polished amber
knotted at the center? Yes. Perfect. Small gold hoops in her ears.
Had she forgotten anything? She certainly had. A quick swipe
of mascara. Sheer cherry lip gloss. A dab of powder on her
suddenly shiny nose.
She took a steadying breath. Another. Ready or not, she
thought, and she unlocked the bedroom door.
He was right outside it, waiting for her.
‘Gorgeous’was the wrong word to describe him. ‘Spectacular’
came closer, but it still didn’t quite cover it.
Say something, Maria told herself, but her brain was numb.
She could only look at him as he stood leaning back against the
cypress balustrade that enclosed the open loft, arms folded,
ankles crossed, the very portrait of The Male Waiting for his
Date. He wore a grey jacket, a black open-necked shirt, black
SANDRA MARTON 105
trousers and darkest brown mocs. His hair was damp; he was
freshly shaven…
He was beautiful. The in-the-flesh subject of a woman’s
dreams, except she didn’t have dreams like those. Well, not until
after that night they’d made love. Correction. That night they’d
had sex, and look where that had led.
He said nothing. Showed nothing. Slowly, slowly enough to
make her wonder if the dress didn’t look as good as she thought,
his gaze traveled from the top of her head all the way to her toes,
then back up again.
That was when he smiled. A slow, lazy, purely masculine
curve of his lips that sent shock waves through her blood.
“Just one thing…” He reached out, took the clip from her hair
and let all the wild curls tumble to her shoulders. “Perfect,” he
said softly.
She had to stop herself from returning the compliment.
Instead, she tossed her head as if it meant nothing. Damned if
that didn’t make him grin.
“Shall we?” he said, holding out his hand.
Maria ignored the offer, brushed past him and went down
the stairs.
His car was a low-slung, snarling crimson beast.
A Maserati. A Lamborghini. A Ferrari. One of those, she was
certain, but what would a born-and-bred New Yorker know?
Subway trains, yes. Automobiles, no. The only certainty was that
he drove fast, too fast, with a macho assurance that she tried not
to let impress her.
But it did.
Was there a female alive who wouldn’t be impressed by a man
so beautiful it hurt to look at him, driving a car that rumbled like
a big, predatory animal? One hand was curved over the steering
wheel. The other rested lightly on the gear shift lever.
Such competent hands. So powerful. His hands had been all
over her the night they’d met. She could still feel them, if she
closed her eyes. His fingertips playing with her nipples. His
106 BILLIONAIRE PRINCE, PREGNANT MISTRESS
thumbs gently parting her labia. Her shocked cries that had
quickly turned to sobs of ecstasy.
She felt the instant bloom of warmth between her thighs.
“Something the matter?”
His voice startled her. She looked at him and thought it was a
good thing he didn’t have X-ray vision or he’d see straight through
her clothes, see that she was wet, that her nipples were peaked.
“Maria?”
I want you, she thought dizzily, that’s what’s the matter.
“Are you worried about dinner tonight?”
No, she thought, on a faint wave of hysteria, not dinner.
“Don’t be. This is just my family.”
Dinner. She had to remember that. Hewas talking about dinner.
“Oh,” she said, and caught her bottom lip between her teeth.
Alex felt his muscles contract. Did she have to look so beautiful?
Did she have to worry her lip that way? Damn it, this was
not good. He should never have kissed her in the guesthouse.
He’d taken two cold showers before he got dressed and he was
still hard with wanting her.
What if he pulled the car over, took her in his arms and nipped
that sweet bottom lip himself? Just lightly enough to make her
moan and sigh and beg him…
“Family?” she said, and he blinked.
“Uh, yes. Family. My older brother, Sebastian. My baby
brother, Andreas. My sister Katarina—everyone calls her Kitty.
The only one missing will be Elissa. She’s in Paris.”
“So many people?”
The tip of her tongue slicked over that softly bitten, now undoubtedly
sensitive bottom lip. By the time they reached the
palace, he’d be completely out of his mind. When had this
woman assumed such power over him? It made him angry, and
his words were more harsh than he’d intended.
“Don’t tell me you’re nervous about meeting royalty, glyka
mou. After all, you did fine with me the first time out.”
She swung toward him.
“I told you, I didn’t know who you were.”
SANDRA MARTON 107
“Right. You just happened to meet me on the street and when
I suggested we go to bed, you said, hey, I have nothing else to
do, so why not?”
It hadn’t been like that and he knew it. She’d been sweetly
innocent; he’d seduced her with words, with caresses, with a need
unlike any he’d ever experienced in all his thirty-one years. Except,
it had all been a lie. She’d set him up. She had seduced him…
Hadn’t she?
“You know what, Alex?” she said, her voice shaking. “You’re
a real bastard!”
She was right. What was between them was personal and had
nothing to do with this evening’s gathering. Tonight was about
plans for the national celebration of his mother’s birthday. Affairs
of state came before everything else, a truth that had always
been part of his life.
“Okay. Let’s start over. Ask me again about who’ll be at
dinner tonight.”
Maria stared straight ahead. Alex sighed in resignation.
“You need to knowthese things, glyka mou. Howelse to prepare
for the sight of Sebastian, who stands four feet tall and weighs three
hundred pounds? Or to know that Andreas is in The Guinness
Book ofWorld Records forWorst Footballer of theYear?”
She swung toward him, as he’d hoped she would. “What?”
Alex grinned. “Don’t panic. We still tease Andreas over the
time he missed six consecutive tries in a game—but we leave out
the fact that he was only five years old at the time. As for
Sebastian…” His grin broadened. “The truth is, except for a lack
of hair anyplace but his knuckles and back, he’s not bad-looking.
Well, he’s not as handsome as I am, of course…”
He couldn’t be.
Alexwas joking, Maria knew. Still, what he’d said about being
handsome was true. He was, without question, the most beautiful
man she’d ever seen… And what did that have to do with
anything? He was still exactly what she’d called him. No-good,
self-centered and arrogant, and if she had not called him all those
names yet, she surely would before the evening ended.
108 BILLIONAIRE PRINCE, PREGNANT MISTRESS
She sat back, folded her hands in her lap and told herself she’d
get through whatever lay ahead because she had no other choice.
The Ferrari paused before the high gates outside the palace. A
smartly uniformed soldier stepped from the guardhouse, approached,
looked in at Alex, shot straight as a ramrod and delivered
a perfect salute.
“Your Highness.”
“Stavros. It’s good to see you pretending to be a soldier again.”
Maria looked at Alex in surprise. The soldier, still saluting, went
on staring directly ahead. “Especially since we both know I can
out-run, out-shoot, out-anything you choose when we have the
chance to give it another try.”
The soldier’s lips twitched. “Your Highness is, as usual, full
of, ah, full of air. Sir.”
Alex laughed and returned the salute. “At ease, Stavros. Good
to see you back. The ankle’s okay?”
The soldier grinned. “It’s fine, sir. And your shoulder?”
“Good to go. You signed up for the next Games?”
“Absolutely, sir. And you?”
“Try and keep me away,” Alex said, smiling.
Another smart salute; the gates opened and they drove slowly
down a wide, tree-lined avenue toward the broad marble steps
that led to the front doors of the palace.
“You and that man know each other?” Maria said.
“For years. We went to nursery school together.” He smiled.
“My mother’s modernist ideas won out that time. My father
thought it was a mistake to educate me among what he tried not
to call the commoners.”
“But he didn’t—I mean, the way he addressed you—”
“What’s the problem, sweetheart? Disappointed to find out
some people don’t think of me as you do?”
He pulled up before the steps. A valet opened his door; another
did the same for Maria. Ahead, the enormous entry doors swung
open. To Maria’s surprise, she saw the world-famous King
Aegeus and Queen Tia in the doorway.
SANDRA MARTON 109
“They asked me to bring you in through the Grand Hall,”Alex
said softly as he moved around the car to stand beside her. “And
they’re greeting you themselves. We are not as formal as some
royal houses but still, this is an honor.” He offered her his arm.
“Take it,” he said softly, “and smile, or my parents will think you
hate me.And you don’t hate me, glyka mou.We both knowthat.”
“Wrong,” Maria said sweetly. “But why should I take it out
on them?”
She put her hand lightly on his arm, took a deep breath, and
let him lead her up the steps.
“…and so,” Princess Kitty said, “Alex convinced me that it was
my royal obligation to sneak into the butler’s pantry to find out
what our parents had bought us for Christmas—well, it wasn’t a
butler’s pantry anymore, of course, it was just this huge room we
store stuff in at the beach house at Kionia—has Alex told you
about Kionia? Oh, it’s this incredible stretch of land overlooking
the Strait of Poseidon that separates us from Calista, and our
house is big and old and beautiful, and it’s all very laid-back, you
know, I can go around dressed casually—”
“Sloppily, you mean,” Aegeus said, his tone harsh. “And
why are we boring our guest with talk of childish pranks done
years ago?”
The family dining room became silent. Kitty’s round, pretty
face turned crimson. “Of course. Ms. Santos, my apologies.”
“Oh, please, don’t apologize.” Without thinking, Maria
reached for the princess’s hand. “It’s lovely to hear stories like
that. My own childhood wasn’t as much fun. No brothers. No
sisters.” Suddenly, she realized that every eye was on her, and
that she was hanging onto Kitty’s hand as if it belonged to Sela
and not a princess. Flushed, she let go. “I mean—I mean, this
has been such a lovely evening…You’ve all been so—so—”
“It’s been our pleasure, Ms. Santos,” the queen said gently.
“Please, won’t you all call me Maria?”
“Maria.” Tia smiled. “I hope you intend to see some of our
island in the next few weeks.”
110 BILLIONAIRE PRINCE, PREGNANT MISTRESS
Maria shot a glance at Alex, who was calmly drinking his
coffee. “If I have the chance.”
“I’m fascinated by the thought of such a slip of a girl designing
and making such a magnificent necklace. I understand
Alex has outfitted a workshop for you in his home on
the coast.”
“Yes.” This time, Maria didn’t dare look at Alex. “He has.”
“And is it to your liking?”
What was the sense in lying? “Very much so, Your Majesty.
In fact, it’s better equipped than my own place in New York.”
“Good. If you should need anything more—”
“Well, I do need something. A couple of things, actually…”
“Such as?”
“Some information, to start. I understand that King Christos
ordered the Stefani diamond, which had been the centerpiece of
the crown of Adamas, to be split in two.”
She could almost feel the sudden tension in the room.
“I fail to see why the history of Adamas should be under discussion,”
the king said stiffly.
Maria cleared her throat. “I don’t mean to pry, Your Majesty.
It’s only that knowing the history of the diamond will help me
in creating the necklace.”
“Nonsense. Gold and diamonds well help, not timeworn stories
about the Stefani diamond and the islands of Aristo and Calista.”
Silence. Then Maria felt Alex clasp her hand under cover of
the table and enfold it in his own.
“Maria is an artist, Father. Her creations are, in a sense, representations
of a life force—in this case, a celebration of
Mother’s birthday as well as the continuity of our people. She’s
simply trying to gain some understanding of our kingdom. Isn’t
that right, Maria?”
“Yes,” she said, staring at Alex, amazed he should instinctively
comprehend what most people did not. “Stories,
legends, history…those are some of the qualities my work is
meant to convey.”
“Well, our history isn’t very complicated,” Sebastian said
SANDRA MARTON 111
pleasantly. “The Kingdom of Adamas dates back to ancient
Rome and Greece.”
“Yes,” Maria said again. “Alex told me it did.”
“Aristo was the island from which the kingdom was ruled. It
grew wealthy on its trade routes with Greece, Turkey and Egypt,”
Andreas said. “Calista had—has—its diamond mines. Pink
diamonds. Very rare—but, of course, you know that.”
Alex squeezed her hand in reassurance.
“The Karedes family—our family—got fat and rich trading
those diamonds to Europe.” He smiled wryly. “As you can probably
imagine, the Calistans didn’t like that. My grandfather—”
“King Christos,” Maria said.
“Yes. He tried to alleviate the tension but it didn’t work, so
he announced that on his death, he’d leave Aristo to be ruled by
my father and Calista to be ruled by my father’s sister, Anya.”
“And the people accepted that?”
“What else could they do?” Sebastian said. “But Christos
always hoped for a reconciliation. Part of what he said, when he
made his decision public, was that he wished the two halves of
the Stefani diamond would someday be reunited and that when
they were, the island would also be reunited as one nation, the
nation of Adamas. We call it Christos’s Legacy.”
Kitty nodded. “But it hasn’t happened.”
“That must have been a difficult time for everyone.” Maria
looked at the king. “For you and your sister, especially, sir.”
“It’s all in the past,” Aegeus snapped. “And I fail to see a need
to go through it with a stranger.” He tossed his napkin on the
table. “You are to make a necklace for the queen, Ms. Santos,
not write our family’s history.”
“Just a minute,” Alex began, but Maria spoke first.
“My sole interest is in making the necklace as meaningful and
perfect a gift as possible, sir.” She sounded composed but Alex
recognized that distinct, don’t-screw-with-me lift of her chin. “I
regret that you don’t see it that way.”
Alex bit back a grin. His Maria had been nervous about dining
with royalty, but she sure as hell had the balls to stand up to
112 BILLIONAIRE PRINCE, PREGNANT MISTRESS
Aegeus. His brothers were trying not to smile; his sister looked
as if she might fly from her seat, grab Maria and kiss her. The
queen gave a soft cough and covered her mouth with her napkin.
Aegeus looked as if he weren’t sure if he’d been insulted or
not. Finally he nodded, shoved back his chair and got to his feet.
The meal was over.
“Perhaps I overreacted, Ms. Santos. At any rate, a perfect gift
is my wish, too. And now, if you require nothing further—”
“Actually,” Maria said carefully, “actually, sir, I do.”
Aegeus stared at her. So did the others.You could push the king
just so far and then you had to stand back before the explosion.
“Do you, indeed?” he said coldly.
Maria looked determined but she was shaking. Enough, Alex
decided, and, despite all the eyes on her, he moved closer and
slipped his arm around her shoulders. At first, she stiffened.
Then he felt her lean into him.
“It’s—it’s a request, sir.” She took a deep breath. “I’d like to
see the Aristan crown.”
“You have seen it,” the king said coolly. “My people provided
you with photographs.”
“Photos aren’t the same as the real thing, Your Majesty.”
“Impossible. For security purposes, the crown is kept in the
royal vaults.”
“Surely, it can be taken out of the vaults, Father,” Alex said
quietly.
“There is no need.”
“Oh, but there is, sir,” Maria said quickly. “I need to be certain
the center diamond in the necklace, the big pink one, will be the
correct shade. A diamond’s true color can never be conveyed
through a photo, no matter how good the photo is.”
“You mentioned color in your proposal. That is the reason I
provided you with two large pink stones rather than one.” The
king’s lips twisted. “Surely you noticed that.”
“Of course, Your Majesty. And I very much appreciate that
thoughtful gesture.”
“Thoughtful, and expensive, Ms. Santos.”
SANDRA MARTON 113
“It was a generous thing to do, sir.” Maria drew a breath. “But
there are slight variations in the colors of the two pink diamonds.
That’s all the more reason for seeing the crown.”
“I refer you, again, to the photographs. I have been assured
that digital photos are quite accurate.”
“Not when it comes to color,” Maria said with quiet determination.
“Plus, I need to see, to touch the Aristan half of the
Stefani diamond.” She flushed. “Stones have a way of
speaking to those who work with them, sir. I know it may
sound strange—”
“Strange?” Aegeus snorted. “It would seem I was correct in
fearing this young woman might be a leftover flower child,” he
said to no one in particular, “instead of a jewelry maker.”
“Actually, Father,” Alex said coldly, “Maria is neither.” He
felt her body jerk against his. Deliberately, he drew her closer.
“She is an artist, and we are very fortunate she agreed to
create this piece.” His eyes met Aegeus’s. “I think you owe her
an apology.”
The king’s face turned red. No one spoke for what seemed an
eternity. Then the queen cleared her throat, stood and took her
husband’s arm.
“Aegeus, Alexandros. Please, let’s not spoil the wonderful
plans for my birthday celebration. I am so excited about this
necklace… Just think, Aegeus, the entire world will be watching
when you present it to me. The necklace should, indeed, be as
perfect as Ms. Santos can make it, should it not? It should glow
with the same light as the Aristan crown, especially since you’ll
be wearing the crown that night.”
Silence. A muscle knotted in Alex’s jaw. Then he nodded.
“Mother is right, Father. I’m sorry if I seemed rude, but I
spoke the truth. Maria’s talent will ensure that people everywhere
will talk of Aristo, its crown and the queen’s matching
necklace for years to come.”
The king stood as still as a statue. Then, at last, he jerked his
head in assent.
“I’ll make the arrangements. Ms. Santos, you shall have five
114 BILLIONAIRE PRINCE, PREGNANT MISTRESS
minutes with the crown and the Stefani diamond. Five minutes,
and not a second more. Is that clear?”
Maria stepped free of Alex’s encircling arm and made a
deep curtsy.
“It is, sir. And thank you. You won’t regret your decision.”
Aegeus looked at her.A shadow seemed to pass over his face.
“I hope not,” he said, and strode away.
They drove back to the mansion in silence.
The gates swung open; the Ferrari purred down the long drive.
When they reached the house, Alex turned off the engine, stepped
from the car, opened Maria’s door and thought what an amazing
woman she was.
Bright. Talented. Strong.
And lovely.
Incredibly lovely, in the moonlight.
She would be even more lovely in his bed.
Naked. Her eyes on his as he undressed. Her arms reaching
for him as he came to her and she would reach for him, he
would find a way to make her admit how much she wanted
him—and yet, at this moment, what he wanted most was to kiss
away the worried furrow between her eyes, the sad little downcurve
of her mouth.
He held out his hand. “We’re home,” he said softly.
She nodded, took his hand and stepped from the car.
“Your father will probably sendmeback to the States tomorrow.”
Alex smiled. “No danger of that,” he said as they walked to
the door. “He’s trapped. My mother, clever woman that she is,
reminded him that the world will be watching when she celebrates
her birthday.”
“Don’t try and make it sound as if I didn’t behave foolishly!”
“The word I’d use is ‘bravely.’”
“I don’t know what got into me. It’s just—”
“What got into you,” he said, turning her to him, “was all that
fiery passion you do your best to hide.”
“I don’t hide anything. I just—”
SANDRA MARTON 115
“And you do a pretty good job of it—until something comes
along and heats your blood.” He opened the door to the
sleeping house, then turned toward her again and caught a
cluster of silky curls in his fingers. “Tonight, it was the ridiculous
behavior of a king.”
“No. I mean, I only—”
“And your dedication to your art.”
“That’s—that’s nice of you to say, but I made everyone uncomfortable——”
“And me.” His voice roughened. He cupped the nape of her
neck, slipped his fingers into her hair and tilted her face to his.
“I heat your blood, agapimeni. As you heat mine.”
He bent his head and kissed her. It was a gentle kiss, the soft
whisper of his lips over hers, but it made him groan.
“Maria,” he said softly, and he felt her tremble. “Maria,” he
said again, and her arms rose, wound around his neck; she lifted
herself to him, sighed his name and when he kissed her again he
went deep. Deeper, letting the taste of her fill his senses, the feel
of her feed his soul…
And he knew, without question, that he could not, would not
hold her to the devil’s bargain they’d made.
Gently, he cupped her face and drew back. Her eyes opened
slowly; she looked up at him, her pupils dark and wide and
blurred with desire or perhaps with tears. It killed him that he
couldn’t tell the difference.
“It’s late,” he said. “Too late to discuss this tonight.” His gaze
fell to her lips. He longed to kiss her again but he wouldn’t. He
wouldn’t. He wouldn’t. “Can you find your way to your
bedroom alone?”
“But I thought— You said—”
“I know what I said.” He drew a ragged breath and then, to
hell with it, he kissed her. “I’m not a saint, Maria,” he whispered
against her mouth, “but it turns out that I’m not quite the bastard
we both thought.”
A sound that might have been a sob broke from her throat. “I
don’t understand, Alexandros. What is it you want from me?”
116 BILLIONAIRE PRINCE, PREGNANT MISTRESS
He shook his head, left her standing alone as he headed out
into the night.
He didn’t know what he wanted from her.
And that was the whole damned problem.
SANDRA MARTON 117
CHAPTER NINE
WHAT did a man do when he was obviously losing his sanity?
It had to be that because he sure as hell wasn’t into martyrdom,
Alex thought as he paced through the dark garden. Maybe
he deserved a medal. Better still, maybe he should get his head
checked by a shrink because right now, right now, instead of
burning with frustration, he could be bedding the woman he’d
brought across an ocean for expressly that purpose.
Maria had been his. His for the taking.
And he’d walked away.
“Idiot,” he said, kicking a stone out of the path.
Walked away, and for what reason? She’d been as ready for
sex as he was. She wasn’t an innocent. Nothing he’d have done
would have shocked her.
Alex glared at the house where a light still burned in his
bedroom window. He could be in the house, in that room in less
than a minute.
Forget it.
He’d made his decision. For tonight, anyway. Going back
would be an admission of weakness, never mind that he didn’t
really know what in hell he meant by that, except that he knew
it would be.
He needed sex, not Maria. That put things in perspective.
He was aroused. No problem. There were ways to deal with
it. Phone one of the numbers programmed into his cell phone.
SANDRA MARTON 119
There were half a dozen beautiful women who’d jump at the
chance to spend the night with him. Or he could drive back into
town. The bar at The Grand Hotel saw more than its share of
gorgeous women, tourists hoping for a little adventure.
Except, he didn’t want another woman, and wasn’t that a
laugh? He wanted Maria and he’d just walked away from her.
Alex kicked another stone and headed for his Ferrari.
He roared out of the gates, took the coast road at a speed that
sent him flying past the few startled drivers on the road at this
late hour. When he reached the point at which the already
narrow, winding road grew more treacherous, he floored the gas
pedal and the car careered through the turns like the thoroughbred
it was.
Maybe that would burn away the hunger thrumming
through his blood.
It didn’t.
Two hours later, he pulled through the gates of the mansion
again and skidded to a stop with Maria still in his head.
Images. Memories. Tastes and scents, all of them conspiring
against him. The softness of her skin. The honey of her mouth.
The texture of her uptilted nipples on his tongue. The scent of
her desire.
She was there, in his brain, and nothing could dislodge her.
Well, yeah. One thing could.
His body hardened like a fist.
Having her would do it. Stripping off her clothes. Baring her
body to his eyes. To his hands. His mouth. Clasping her wrists,
holding them high over her head so she had no choice but to let
him touch her everywhere until she wept with wanting him.
Then he’d sink into her. Deep, deep into her. He’d move
inside her until she screamed his name, until she came and
came and came…
A growl of anger, of desire, of something close to lunacy rose
in his throat. He crossed his hands on the steering wheel and
slammed his forehead against them. After a few minutes, he
stepped from the car and entered the house.
It was quiet. Dark. The furniture cast ominous black shadows
against the walls.
Alex’s mouth thinned as he stood in the entry foyer and stared
up at the second floor landing.
He was no knight in shining armor. He was a man who had
grown up in a world of privilege, a man who could have what he
wanted when he wanted it. Especially women. The more beautiful
they were, the more famous, the more they threw themselves
at his feet. They begged for his possession. Preened to ready
themselves for his taking, not like Maria who asked nothing of
him and had packed a suitcase full of jeans to wear in her role
as his mistress.
She looked beautiful in jeans.
And in that dress tonight, those sexy shoes, stuff he’d ordered
over the phone just figuring anything the color of emeralds would
be perfect against her dark hair and eyes…
When she’d opened that door, when he saw her… God, he’d
wanted to push her back inside the room, tumble her on the bed,
make love to her until she had no choice but to admit she’d
dreamed of this, ached for this, that she wanted him, only him…
He swung away from the staircase, marched through the silent
house to his study, poured himself a shot of brandy, slugged it
down and did what he’d been doing hours ago in the garden,
paced and paced and paced.
A sto diavolo! The hell with it! He was weary of the game. It
was time to end it.
He took the stairs two at a time, went down the hall, stopped
before the door to his bedroom, raised his fist to knock… Knock?
At his own damned door? Bad enough he’d showered and
dressed in his study, that he’d spent the last couple of hours
driving aimlessly through the night. He cursed, ripely and creatively,
grabbed the knob and turned it, ready to break the damned
door down if he had to.
It opened easily.
Maria wasn’t there. The emerald dress was crumpled on a
chair, the black stilettos were on the floor next to it.
120 BILLIONAIRE PRINCE, PREGNANT MISTRESS
The bed was untouched.
His anger vanished. Fear took its place.Wherewas she? Had she
left? Not likely. She’d have had to phone for a taxi, and a cabwould
not have been able to clear the gates without alerting Security.
What, then? Had she gone for a walk ? Alex’s mouth tightened.
She wouldn’t have done that, would she? Not at night. Not
when she didn’t know the complex layout of the gardens, the
density of the surrounding trees.
The way some of the pathways ended at vistas at the very edge
of the cliff.
No, he thought, forcing aside the ugly possibility. If she were
wandering the grounds, motion detectors would have picked her
up. Then where…?
The guesthouse!
Alex pounded down the stairs and out the door, walking fast,
running, really, his anger back and hotter than ever. Did she
think she could escape him? That he’d let her sleep there rather
than in his bed, where she belonged? Yes. There was a faint light
shining in the guesthouse window.
“Damn it, Maria,” he growled as he flung open the door, “if
you think I’m going to go on being a Boy Scout…”
The furious words died on his tongue.
She was huddled in a window seat, illuminated by the flickering
glow of candlelight. She wore jeans and an oversized
sweatshirt, her feet were tucked up under her and when she heard
his voice, she swung toward him, face pale, eyes huge and
stricken and glittering with tears.
“I’m sorry,” she said in a broken whisper. “I’m sorry for everything,
Alexandros. I should never have come here. I know
what I agreed to but I can’t do it, I can’t, I can’t.”
By then, he’d crossed the space between them and gathered
her into his arms.
“Don’t,” she said.
He ignored the plea, whispered to her in Greek the way he
might have whispered to a terrified child. He stroked her hair,
rocked her against him and she began to sob.
SANDRA MARTON 121
“I know I agreed to—to be your mistress, but I can’t do it.
Even if it means losing the commission. I can’t. I can’t. I really
thought I could but—”
“No. Of course, you can’t.” He drew her into his lap. “Shh,
glyka mou. I won’t hurt you. I could never hurt you. Please,
don’t cry.”
“I didn’t know who you were that night, Alexandros. I swear
it. I went with you because—because…I can’t explain it. I’d
never done anything like that before. I’d never even—I’d never
even—” She drew a ragged breath. “I know you won’t believe
me but—but I’d never been with a man before.”
Ah, dear Lord!
The sweet, sad little confession made him feel like a bastard—
and filled him with joy. He did believe her; the truth was, he’d
known it, deep within himself, all along. His beautiful Maria had
given him her innocence. Hell, he had taken it from her. And, of
course, she had not known who he was.
She was incapable of that kind of subterfuge.
Why hadn’t he believed her? How could he have been so
stupid? How could he have judged her by what he knew of other
women, the ones who’d tried to trap him with their lies? There
had been so many of them, starting with the Greek girl who’d
broken his heart when they’d both been kids. He’d been sure he
loved her and when she wept and trembled and told him he’d
stolen her virginity, he’d been ready to marry her—until he’d
caught her laughing with her friends at his gullibility. The Italian
debutante who said she’d die in sin if he didn’t take her as his
wife, except it turned out she’d already slept with half the young
princes in Europe. The German supermodel who’d accused him
of making her pregnant. Wiser than in the past, he’d demanded
a paternity test—and had not heard from her again.
But Maria was nothing like that. She was—she was Maria,
sweet and smart and brave, and he’d put her through hell.
“I’ll recommend someone good, someone excellent to take
my place making the necklace,” she said in a low voice . “You
can let him use my design—I owe your mother that—but—”
122 BILLIONAIRE PRINCE, PREGNANT MISTRESS
Alex stopped the flow of words with a soft kiss.
“You owe no one anything, glyka mou. And why would I let
someone take your place?” Smiling, he thumbed a strand of
dark hair from her brow. “There is no one who could replace you,
sweetheart. Like your design, you are one of a kind.”
“But I just told you, I can’t—”
“Maria.” He framed her face with his hands. “I’m setting you
free of our agreement. You’ll stay here, create a necklace the
entire world will admire—but not because we’ve made love.” He
took a deep breath. “I want you, kardia mou. I want you so much
it hurts. But I would never take something you would not willingly
give.” His mouth twisted. “I did that to you once, and I will
never forgive myself for—”
She put her fingers lightly over his mouth.
“I gave myself to you that night, Alex. I wanted you.” She
swallowed, ran the tip of her tongue over her bottom lip. “I
want you now.”
Could a woman’s soft words make the universe tilt? “Sweetheart.
Do you know what you’re saying?”
She gave a watery little laugh. “I know exactly what I’m
saying. That’s why I can’t stay here. I want you, despite what you
think of me, and isn’t that terrible? To admit something that—
that strips me of what little pride I have left—”
He kissed her. “Hush,” he whispered.
“It’s the truth. If I had any pride, I wouldn’t have come to
Aristo with you. I wouldn’t have said I’d sleep with you.
Because—because it wasn’t only the commission, Alex, it was
being with you…”
He kissed her again. He meant the kiss to be gentle and that
was how it began but somehow her lips parted under his. The tip
of her tongue slipped into his mouth. And when she wound her
arms around his neck and dragged his face down to hers, he
reached blindly for one final bit of sanity.
“Maria,” he said against her mouth, “sweetheart, be sure. Be
very sure—”
“I’ve never been more sure of anything in my life.”
SANDRA MARTON 123
Alex groaned, swept her into his arms and carried her through
the moonlight to the bed.
This bed was not like his.
It was smaller. Simpler. It had been made from a centuriesold
olive tree and was covered in white cotton loomed in a nearby
village. It had an intrinsic, natural beauty all its own.
It was, Alex thought as he lay Maria across it, beautiful in the
same way as she, with a quiet strength and an elegance that came
from within.
“Alexandros,” she sighed, and raised her arms to him.
He went into her embrace and kissed her.
Two months ago, a lifetime ago, they had made love fiercely.
He had all but torn off her clothes in his frenzy to bury himself
inside her.
That had been sex.
Now…now, it was something more.
He kissed her again and again, until her lips were as soft as
rose petals and clung hungrily to his. He framed her face,
threaded his fingers into her hair, kissed her throat, nipped at the
tender flesh at the juncture of neck and shoulder and when she
moaned with pleasure, he could have sworn he felt his heart lift
in his chest.
Slowly, he sat her up. Drew her sweatshirt over her head and
discovered, to his delight, that she wore nothing beneath it or the
jeans that he tossed aside.
Naked, she was a moon-kissed offering to the gods.
Beautiful. Perfect. Exquisitely feminine.
Slowly, so slowly, his eyes on hers, he stroked the contours
of her body. Her breasts. Her belly. Her thighs. She sighed and
moaned and made the kinds of little sounds that told him, as much
as the sensual lift of her hips, that what hewas doing pleased her.
Still, he had to ask.
“Do you like this?” he whispered, sucking a beaded nipple
deep into the heat of his mouth. “This?” he said, kissing his way
from breast to belly. “This?” he said softly, dropping a kiss on
the soft curls at the juncture of her thighs.
124 BILLIONAIRE PRINCE, PREGNANT MISTRESS
“Alexandros,” she said, “oh God, Alexandros…”
Gently, he parted her thighs. Put his hands under her bottom.
Lifted her to him, put his mouth to the delicate cleft of her flesh,
found her with his mouth, his tongue, and her scream of joy shattered
the night.
It was almost too much for him.
He was so close to the edge. All these weeks of wanting her.
And, though it seemed crazy, all the years ofwanting her, as well.
“Alexandros,” she whispered, and he kissed her mouth, her
throat and knew that he, like Paris when he stole Helen centuries
before, had not been able to obey the rules of the civilized
world. This was what he had wanted, this woman, this lover, and
he had done whatever it took to have her.
He would have given everything for this, the honeyed taste of
her mouth. This, the sweetness of her nipples. This, the indentation
of her navel. This, the curve of her hips.
This, he thought, just this, holding her, tasting her, watching
her face as he caressed her. As he again parted the delicate petals
that protected her clitoris.
He kissed her there again. Licked her until she came again.
This time, when she cried out, she reached for him.
“Please, Alexandros,” she said, “please. Come into me.”
Quickly, he tore off his clothes. Came back to her, swore,
reached for his discarded jacket, dug into the inside pocket and
prayed he’d find a condom. He did, and he tore the little packet
open, rolled the condom on. He’d forgotten to use one the first time
he’d made love to her; he’d been too hungry, too out of control.
He was almost out of control now. That was what happened
to him, when he was with her.
He moved up her body, took her in his arms, kissed her, let
her taste the proof of their passion in his kiss. Her hands were
on him now, cool against his skin. She stroked her palms along
his shoulders, his chest, down his belly and when one hand
moved lower and almost closed around his hard length, his breath
hissed between his teeth.
“Maria,” he said in a warning whisper. “Maria, glyka mou…”
SANDRA MARTON 125
126 BILLIONAIRE PRINCE, PREGNANT MISTRESS
She caressed him anyway, her hand moving, moving up and
down over his swollen sex, and he groaned, caught her hand and
stilled it and knew he could wait no longer.
“Look at me, agapi mou.Watch me as I make you mine.”
Her lashes lifted. Her eyes met his. He clasped both her hands.
Laced their fingers together. Held their hands to the sides and
thrust into her.
She came instantly, her body arching to his, her cries of
abandon rising into the night and still he eased forward. Deeper.
Deeper until there was no way to know where he began and she
ended, until their flesh, their souls, were one.
“Maria,” he said, “Maria, kardia mou, agapi mou…”
She wept and kissed his mouth, and as the muscles of her
womb contracted rhythmically around him, Alexandros threw
back his head and emptied himself into the sweet warmth of the
woman who now belonged to him.
To me, he thought fiercely. Only to me.
CHAPTER TEN
FOR a long moment, the world stood still.
Alex’s powerful body was sprawled over Maria’s, his face
buried in her throat, their hearts still racing, skin damp with the
commingled sweat of their passion. The night breeze, drifting
across them from the still-open door, was chill. But when Alex
began to ease away, Maria tightened her arms around him.
“Don’t go,” she murmured, and felt his lips curve in a smile.
“I’m not going very far.”
He reached for the throw at the foot of the bed, wrapped it
around them, rolled to his side and gathered her close in his arms.
“Are you all right?”
It was her turn to smile. “Yes.”
“You sure?””
“Very sure. I’m fine. I’m perfect. I’m—”
“Yes,” he said, laughing softly as he kissed her, “you are.”
Tenderly, he brushed back the tangled curls on her forehead.
“Forgive me, agapi mou.”
“For what?”
“For not making love to you this way the first time.”
She shook her head, lay her hand against his cheek. “That first
time was wonderful.”
A very male smile lit his face. “Thank you. But you were a
virgin. I should have gone slower.”
“You didn’t know.”
128 BILLIONAIRE PRINCE, PREGNANT MISTRESS
“I should have.” He turned his face into her hand and kissed
the palm. “There was such a sweetness to you, glyka mou. Such
an innocence. The way you touched me. Responded to me.” His
hand slipped down her body, cupping her breast, then the curve
of her hip. “I’ve relived those moments a hundred times,” he said
huskily. “The feel of you.Your little cries. The way you blushed
when I undressed you.” His mouth twisted. “The way I ruined it
all with my terrible accusations.”
Maria put a finger over his lips. “Didn’t some wise man once
say that the past is best left in the past?”
Alex drew her fingertip into the heat of his mouth. “Do you
forgive me?”
“Forgive you for what?” she said, with a little smile. “I don’t
know what you’re talking about, Alexandros.”
His eyes darkened. “I love how you say my name.”
“Alexandros,” she sighed, “Alexandros, Alexandros,
Alexandros…”
Just that—the sound of her voice, the feel of her against him—
and he felt himself turning hard. “Maria,” he said, “my Maria,”
and then he was inside her again, deep inside her, and the night
enfolded them in its magical embrace.
Just before sunrise, when the grass glittered with dew, they
dressed and made their way to the house.
“Someone will see us,” Maria hissed as Alex drew her inside.
“Who could possibly see us?”
“Spoken like a true potentate,” she said, laughing up at him.
“What aboutAthenia? The cook? The maids? The rest of the staff?”
Alex swung her into his arms and carried her to his room.
“The souls of discretion, I promise.”
Well, of course. They would be. Maria’s smile dimmed just
a little. No point in being foolish about this. Other women would
have slept in Alex’s bed…
“No.”
She looked up. Alex was watching her and smiling.
“No, what?”
SANDRA MARTON 129
“No other women, sweetheart. Not here.” He could see that
she was surprised. And pleased. Crazy as it seemed, so was he.
He set her on her feet, gently pushed her back against the
closed bedroom door and framed her face with his hands. “Just
you. Which means,” he said solemnly, but with a glint of
laughter in his eyes, “we’re going to have to celebrate the
occasion. Initiate my bed properly.” He bent his head, brushed
her lips with his. “Champagne. Candles. Rose petals. How
does that sound?”
Could he feel her heart racing? Could he possibly know what
was in that racing heart, the emotions that she had spent the past
two months, the past two days trying her best to deny?
“It sounds wonderful.” She moved, just a little, enough so she
was pressed against him. “But won’t it take an awfully long time
to get all those things together?”
She saw the change sweep through him. The narrowed mouth.
The tic of a muscle in his jaw. The hint of exciting male passion
that seemed to make the beautiful structure of his face even more
pronounced.
“Maria,” he said thickly, “Dear God, Maria…”
They didn’t make it to the bed. Not then. But they did the next
time, and the next, where they made love until the Aristan sun
blazed bright and hot in the perfect blue of the sky.
When he awoke, the space beside him was empty. He sat up, the
covers falling to his waist.
“Maria?” Naked, he padded to the bathroom. The door was
locked; he heard the sound of running water and then nothing.
