“Maria?” he said again, and knocked.
“I’m fine,” she called, but the weak sound of her voice was
evidence of the lie. His heart turned over. She’d been sick before,
sick again, and now… “Maria? Open the door. Please.”
There was a silence. Then he heard the lock turn. The door
swung open and he saw his Maria, standing at the sink with a
toothbrush in her hand, looking at him in the mirror. She smiled,
but her face was pale and sweaty.
“Kardia mou,” Alex said urgently, stepping behind her and
encircling her with his arms, “were you ill again?”
She nodded. “A little.”
“Maria, this has happened too often.”
“It’s just flu, Alexandros,” she said, forcing another smile.
“New York’s loaded with it.”
“This is not flu. I had flu last winter. Andreas had it, too. With
flu you’re sick and then you get better. But you—you’re not
getting better.”
“I am. Much better.”
“I will take you to my doctor.”
“Don’t be silly.”
“He will examine you, glyka mou, and prescribe an antibiotic.”
“Antibiotics don’t work against viruses, and flu is a virus.”
“Such logic,” Alex said, trying to sound angry when what he
felt was fear. She was so pale, her eyes so dark… “Come here,”
he said, and turned her and drew her close. “I don’t want you to
be sick, sweetheart. Let me take care of you.”
“I’m fine. Honestly.”
“Thee mou, you’re a stubborn woman! Very well. No doctor.”
He swung her up in his arms. “At least, come back to bed and
rest for a little while.”
He carried her to the bed and lay down with her in his arms.
Kissed her tenderly. Stroked her back. And, inevitably, as he held
her, as his body heated hers, as she burrowed against him, tenderness
gave way to desire.
“Are you sure you’re okay?” he whispered as he touched her.
“Shall I stop?”
“Don’t stop,” she whispered back, “don’t ever stop.”
And he didn’t.
She was gone again, the next time he awoke.
A knot of apprehension formed in his belly but the bathroom
door stood open and the room was empty.
He showered quickly, pulled on jeans, a white T-shirt and
mocs, and went downstairs. He could hear the radio playing
130 BILLIONAIRE PRINCE, PREGNANT MISTRESS
softly in the kitchen, turned to Athenia’s favorite music station.
She smiled at him.
“Kalimera, sir.”
“Have you seen Miss Santos?”
“Oh, yes, perhaps an hour ago. She had coffee and—”
“She was all right?”
His housekeeper raised her eyebrows. “Fine, sir. She went to
the guesthouse. To her workshop, I mean.”
The workshop. Alex ran a hand through his hair. “Of course,”
he said sheepishly.
He found her there, perched on a high stool at a workbench.
She was wearing jeans and a blue chambray shirt with the
sleeves rolled up. She’d pulled her hair back in a ponytail; her
feet were bare, one on the rung of the stool, one on the floor.
She was bent over a sketchpad, intensity in every line of her
body, and humming something he couldn’t identify other than
to be sure the tune was almost painfully off-key.
He smiled, came up behind her quietly and slipped his arms
around her.
“Kalimera, kardoula mou,” he said softly, and kissed the nape
of her neck.
She sank back against him, her head against his shoulder, her
hands covering his.
“Kalimera, Alexandros,” she said, and turned her face to his
for a kiss.
“Mmm,” he said. She tasted wonderful, of coffee and of
herself. “I missed you.”
She laughed. “I’m glad to hear it.”
Alex grinned and turned her in his arms. “Then, why were you
in such a hurry to leave my bed?”
“Oh, I wasn’t in a hurry at all!” She blushed. “I mean—”
“Such a nice compliment, glyka mou. No need to explain it
away.”
Maria linked her hands behind his neck. “I woke up and
thought of a small change I want to make in your mother’s
necklace. Nothing that will alter the design,” she said hastily,
SANDRA MARTON 131
“just a modification in the way I planned to position the central
stone. I promise, she’ll still like it.”
“She’ll love it, Maria. She thinks the design, your work, all
the pictures you sent, are brilliant.”
Her face glowed with pleasure. “I’m so glad, Alexandros! This
commission means the world to me.”
His gaze fell to her lips. “What else means the world to you?”
he said huskily.
His hands slid under her shirt, cupped her breasts. Her
breath caught; he watched her eyes turn from hazel to coffeebrown
to ink-black.
“This,” she said, covering his hands with hers, “oh, this,
this, this…”
He carried her to the bed. And as he came down beside her
and kissed her, as they undressed each other, as she kissed his
mouth, his throat, his chest, his belly and, at last, touched the tip
of her tongue to the silk-over-steel power of his erection, she
knew that what she’d just told him was only partly true.
This—touching him, kissing him, sharing his passion—did
mean the world, but only because—because…
Because she loved him.
They had brunch, what Athenia referred to as a kolatsio, a
snack, on a terrace overlooking the water. Thick, sweet Greek
coffee. Olives. Feta cheese. Slices of warm, delicious bread and
a tray of sweet cheese pastries that Alex said were called
kalitsounia kritis.
They should have been called heavenly. The pastries were delicious
and decadent and surely fattening but Maria didn’t care.
She would not worry about anything this morning, not when life
was so perfect. Even the day was perfect. Bright. Sunny. Warm.
Unusual for the time of year, Alexandros said, and nothing like
the weather they’d left behind in New York.
The truth was, nothing was like what she’d left in New York.
Not this beautiful place. And not this wonderful, gorgeous, sexy,
strong, funny, caring, intelligent man.
132 BILLIONAIRE PRINCE, PREGNANT MISTRESS
Now, Maria, Sister Sarah would have cautioned, that’s far too
many adjectives.
Yes, Maria thought, but Sister had never met Alex.
He was seated across from her, talking about his house. He
loved it; she could see that in his animated face. He was proud
of it; she could hear that in his voice. How did you come to find
such a perfect house? she’d asked, and he’d said, with a boyish
grin, that he hadn’t found it, he’d built it.
And he had.
He’d worked along with the architect. With the builder. With
the carpenters. He’d wanted a house that blended into its surroundings,
that was spare and strong and unique.
“Like these cliffs,” he said.
Like you, she thought.
He told her that he’d lived in the palace until he’d gone away
to boarding school and then university, and, though he loved its
history and elegance, it had never felt like home. So, once he had
his MBA, he’d bought a condo in Ellos and another in New
York. Then, one weekend at the family compound overlooking
the turbulent waters that separated Aristo and Calista, the Strait
of Poseidon that Kitty had mentioned at dinner, it had suddenly
hit him that what he wanted was a place of his own, overlooking
the sea.
“I’d always loved driving along these cliffs so it seemed
natural to call a friend, a realtor, inquire about property, then
bring another friend, an architect, to see what he might suggest,
and—” Alex laughed. “Look at you, kardoula mou. Your beautiful
eyes are glazing over, thanks to my endless talk about
myself.” He reached for her hands, lifted them to his lips and
kissed them. “What I really want to talk about is you.”
She smiled. “My life isn’t anywhere near as interesting. And
my eyes aren’t glazing over. I love learning things about you,
Alexandros.”
She did. Oh, she did! She’d gone from hating him to loving
him in what seemed a heartbeat but the truth was, she’d fallen in
love with him that first terrible night.
SANDRA MARTON 133
“Still, I won’t say another word until you tell me about
Maria Santos.”
“It’s a dull— Hey,” she said, laughing as Alex, in one fast
move, rose from his chair, tugged her into his arms and settled
into his chair again but this time with her in his lap.
“Okay, then,” he said, “I’ll tell you about her. Maria Santos
was born twenty-five years ago. She was the most beautiful baby
anyone had ever seen.”
Maria began to laugh. “Alex, that’s silly!”
“What?” he said, his eyes round with innocence. “You mean,
you’re not twenty-five? What are you, then? Forty-five? Fiftyfive?
My God, you can’t be sixty—”
“I was not the most beautiful baby anyone had ever seen.”
“I’ll bet you were.”
“I was premature. Tiny. Skinny. Almost bald.”
“Beautiful,” Alex said, grinning, “just as I said.”
Maria rolled her eyes. “You’re crazy, Alexandros.”
“Crazy about you,” he said softly.
Could your heart really sing? She’d never heard such thrilling
words. Her prince. Her lover. HerAlexandroswas crazy about her.
“And I want to know all about you.”
That was wonderful, too. No one had ever wanted to know all
about her, not once in her entire life. Smiling, she pressed her
lips lightly to his.
“Okay,” she said softly, “here’s the entire, unexciting tale. I
was born in the Bronx. I went to school in the Bronx. Public elementary
and middle schools, and high school at Saint Mary’s.
Then I went to college in—”
“The Bronx?” Alex said, and smiled.
“You guessed it. Lehman College. I studied—”
“Art.”
She sighed and lay her head against his shoulder. “I studied
business. Mama’s idea, and I hated it. When everybody was
studying Word and Excel, I sketched. Back then, before I discovered
I loved working with metal and stones, I thought I wanted
to design clothes. Anyway, I stuck it out for a year. Then I did
134 BILLIONAIRE PRINCE, PREGNANT MISTRESS
what I had to do. I worked up a portfolio, arranged for an interview
at FIT—the Fashion Institute of Technology. They accepted
me, I made all the arrangements for a student loan.” She took a
breath. “Then I broke the news to Mama. I told her how hard it
was to get into FIT, I showed her my portfolio, and she said—”
“She said you had amazing talent, and that you’d be the
next—who’s that New York designer? Donna Karan?”
Maria smiled, but her smile trembled. “She said I was a
foolish girl with silly dreams.”
Alex’s arms tightened around her. “Ah, sweetheart, I’m sorry.
I should have figured…I mean, the other night—”
“No, it’s okay. Maybe it’ll help you understand why—why
she acted the way she did when you met her.” She took a deep
breath. “See, my mother never finished high school. She went to
work when she was sixteen, operating a sewing machine in the
garment center. She was determined I would not do the same,
and I couldn’t make her see that I wouldn’t end up that way.”
“And your father?”
“What about him?” she said, with a nonchalance as transparent
as glass. “He owned the company where Mama worked. He
was rich. He had a house on Long Island. He had a big car.” She
cleared her throat. “He also had a wife and kids.”
“And your poor mother had no idea…” Alex said tightly.
“She had every idea.” Maria’s voice turned brittle. “He said
he’d leave his wife and marry her—but, of course, he didn’t. And
then, when she told him she was pregnant with me, he said she
was lying. When he realized it was the truth, he gave her some
money. For an abortion, he said. But she didn’t have an abortion,
she had me instead, and he said that had been her decision, a bad
decision, and then he fired her and she never saw him again.”
Alex had gone very still. Maria bit back a groan. Whatever
had possessed her to tell him all that? She could have just told
him the first part. School. College. FIT. But the rest…Why had
she unloaded that sad, dumb story on him? She never talked
about her life. Never. Joaquin knew, but they’d grown up together.
Sela knew, but she was her best friend. No one else knew that
SANDRA MARTON 135
she was a bastard and yes, that was the right word. It was an oldfashioned
word in lots of places but in Maria’s world, the world
her mother had created and in which she had raised her, the word
still carried the smear of disgrace and dishonor.
Stupid, she told herself fiercely, how incredibly stupid, to tell
such ugly things to a man who might as well have been born and
raised on another planet.
“Well,” she said brightly, “so much for Tales from the Bronx.”
She sat forward in Alex’s lap. “This has been a lovely break,
Alex, but I have to get to work and—”
“Has he never tried to see you?”
“Who?” she said, even more brightly. “Oh, my father? No.
Why would he? I didn’t need anything from him. I wouldn’t take
anything, even if he—”
“How could a man turn his back on the woman who carried
his child? On the child herself?”
“Well, I don’t know, but—”
Alex turned her face to his, cupped it with his hands and
kissed her.
“You’re a strong, brave woman, kardia mou,” he said softly.
“And I am honored to have become your lover.”
They fell into an easy pattern, like lovers who had been together
a long time.
Not that what happened in bed lost its excitement.
It couldn’t, not when the sight of Alex coming toward her sent
Maria’s pulse skittering, not when Maria’s smile was enough to
fill Alex with such hunger that there were times he had to turn
away to keep from sweeping her into his arms and making love
to her wherever they happened to be.
He didn’t always turn away.
He made love to her in the workshop. In the garden. In the
back of the limo with the privacy screen up, bringing her to
climax with his hand high under her skirt, his mouth hot on hers.
And he made love to her in bed. The demure bed in the workshop;
the big, beautiful one in his room. They made love, and talked
136 BILLIONAIRE PRINCE, PREGNANT MISTRESS
and laughed, and worked—she in her workshop, he in his study
at the house. And they discovered all the things they needed to
know about each other.
Maria no longer felt ill. The early morning nausea was a thing
of the past. There were times she still felt exhausted but flu often
left you feeling tired; everyone said so.
The only dark moments came when she remembered that her
days with Alex were slipping away. The necklace was almost
finished, the big birthday celebration loomed on the horizon. A
week passed, then another, and the final week of her stay began.
When it ended, there would be nothing to keep her here.
Unless Alex asked her to stay. And she, who had spent her
life avoiding relationships, who had never imagined repeating
her mother’s foolish involvement with a man who was all
wrong for her…
She knew she would stay, if Alexandros asked her.
But he didn’t. Why would he? How would he? He was a
prince while she—she was a girl born into illegitimacy and raised
in poverty. She could have a place in Alex’s bed but she would
never have one in his life.
So she concentrated on completing the necklace until, finally,
she had only to set one of the fabulous pink stones in its center,
but she had to see the Crown of Aristo before she could do that.
The king kept making appointments for that to happen, then
cancelling them.
On a rainy afternoon just days before the queen’s birthday
party, Maria decided this couldn’t go on. Alex had a meeting in
Ellos. After he was gone, she phoned the palace, left a polite
message with Aegeus’s personal secretary. She had to see the
crown today, she said, or the queen’s gift might not be as perfect
as the king and she both wished.
She hung up the phone and was suddenly overwhelmed by
nausea. It took her by surprise. Apparently, she wasn’t over the
flu quite yet.
She barely made it to the bathroom, where shewas horribly sick.
When the spasms finally ended, she flushed the toilet, brushed
SANDRA MARTON 137
138 BILLIONAIRE PRINCE, PREGNANT MISTRESS
her teeth, rinsed her mouth and started for the bedroom when a
shocking wave of vertigo swept over her.
Maria stumbled and fell against the door jamb. The collision
wasn’t particularly hard but the impact was painful and hurt her
breasts. They’d grown so tender lately; even making love with
Alex, there were times the touch of his mouth on her nipples
came close to being painful…
Oh God!
Tender breasts. Nausea that seemed to have no basis. And, she
thought, biting back a moan, and a period that had not come
in…in, what? Two months? Three?
“No,” she whispered, “please, please, no…”
The phone rang. She tried to ignore it but the ringing went on
and on…
“Hello?”
It was the king’s secretary. She would be permitted to see the
crown an hour from now.
“I can’t,” Maria said, trembling as she counted back, again and
again, to the last time she’d menstruated. “How about this afternoon?
Or this evening?”
“One hour, Ms. Santos,” a commanding voice barked through
the phone, “or not at all.”
It was the king himself, and she knew he meant it.
“I’ll be there, Your Majesty,” she whispered.
She—and the illegitimate royal baby she now realized lay
cradled in her womb.
CHAPTER ELEVEN
MARIA showered quickly and dried her hair while trying not to
think about anything but the meeting with the king…
Impossible, she thought as she dropped onto the edge of the bed.
How could she be pregnant? Alex had used condoms every
time they’d made love.Well, not the very first time, almost three
months ago. Things had happened so quickly that night…
After, he’d said, “You have the right to know that I have no
diseases,” and she, embarrassed by the conversation, had thought
of telling him that she couldn’t possibly have any because she’d
never been with a man until him, but it had been easier to say
that she had none, either.
“I assume you’re on the pill,” he’d added.
Well, of course, shewasn’t. But it had been the safe time of her
cycle so she’d just nodded instead of answering and left it at that.
Maria groaned and buried her face in her hands. She thought
of all the times she’d silently wondered how her mother could
have made so many devastating mistakes. Now, she knew one
answer was that making mistakes when you were swept away
by passion was pathetically easy.
Andall the signs she’d ignored! Nausea.Wooziness. Exhaustion.
Not getting her period. That should have been the most damning
evidence of all, but she’d never been completely regular…
Maybe you didn’t see what you didn’t want to see. Maybe it
was just that simple.
140 BILLIONAIRE PRINCE, PREGNANT MISTRESS
She wanted to weep. To scream. To bang her fists against
the wall. That she, of all women, should have tumbled into the
age-old trap…
She knotted her hands in her lap. Took deep, calming breaths.
Hysteriawouldn’t change anything. Besides, therewas no time for
this now. The necklace. The summons from the king. Those things
came first. She had responsibilities. To the queen. To herself.
She dressed quickly. Black trousers, a black cashmere sweater
and, over it, a pale pink jacket. Black heels. Alex had followed
his gift of the emerald silk dress with what seemed like an endless
wardrobe, ordered from the pricey designer boutiques in Ellos
and delivered to the mansion.
“I can’t let you buy me things like this,” she’d protested, and
he’d kissed her to silence.
“I love giving you gifts, agapi mou,” he’d said, and because
she’d known he meant it, because nothing had turned out as she’d
anticipated and instead of only being in Alex’s bed she was also
in his life, she’d accepted the clothes and wore them when they
went out to dinner, to the theater, to the casino.
Now, the rack of expensive outfits in the dressing room—his
dressing room—was a mocking reminder that these were not
simply gifts, they were proof she was his mistress.
And mistresses did not get pregnant. They did not have babies.
They did not forge real, lasting relationships that led to a joint
future, especially with a man like Alex. A prince of the Royal
House of Karedes…
“Stop it,” she said sharply, and blanked her mind to everything
but the meeting with King Aegeus. She had worked years for this
kind of professional honor.
Right now, that was all that mattered.
Weeks before,Alex had arranged for his limo to be at her disposal.
“Don’t trust me to drive, hmm?” she’d said, laughing.
“Not on these roads, glyka mou,” he’d said, and she’d admitted
that was for the best. A born and bred New Yorker, she’d learned
to drive but she didn’t do it often or well.
SANDRA MARTON 141
Todaywould most certainly not have been a day to test her skill.
The driver had apparently been told where to take her. He
drove through the palace gates to a rear courtyard where an
equerry greeted her and led her through a maze of corridors to a
half-opened door in a gloomy alcove.
“Ms. Santos, sir.”
The king was seated at a small table, a velvet drawstring bag
before him. A chair was drawn up opposite his. Maria blinked.
Were these the royal vaults? She’d expected something different.
Bright lights. Security cameras. Guards. Not a small, plain,
ill-lit room.
“Your Majesty,” she began, but Aegeus cut her off with an imperious
wave. Another wave dismissed the equerry. Aegeus
pointed at the other chair.
“Ms. Santos. Sit down.”
His tone was hard, a direct contrast to his looks. She was surprised
by his pallor and the throb of a vein in his forehead.
“Are you—are you all right, sir?”
Aegeus glared at her. “Are you a physician as well as my
son’s mistress? Oh, don’t look so shocked, Ms. Santos. I’m not
a fool. I am aware of everything that happens in my kingdom.”
“Then you are aware that I’m here as the designer of Queen
Tia’s birthday gift, sir, nothing else.”
She knew she’d overstepped the boundary between commoner
and king but the last thing she would let happen today was a discussion
of her relationship with Alex.
To her surprise,Aegeus laughed. “I can understand Alex’s infatuation.
A woman with beauty and intelligence and spirit…”
His smile tilted. “What man could resist such temptation?”
Maria drew a deep breath. “Your Majesty. The crown…”
Aegeus pushed the velvet bag into the center of the table but
kept his hand protectively on it.
“Normally, it is kept in a display case along with the Crown
Jewels and, of course, the original Crown of Adamas.”
“Yes, sir. To tell the truth, I’m surprised that—”
“Your surprise does not interest me, Ms. Santos. I’ve arranged
to meet you here so we could keep things as simple and private
as possible.” He raised his wrist, pointedly looked at his watch
and then at her. “Five minutes. Then your time is up.”
Maria nodded and reached for the bag. The vein in the king’s
forehead seemed to leap as he lifted his hand and sat back.
She loosened the drawstring and lifted the Crown of Aristo
from it.
Her breath caught. The crown was magnificent.
Brilliant white diamonds shone like star fire even in the dim
light. Yes, she thought happily, yes, they’d match the ones in the
necklace perfectly, but it was the fantastic center stone that
dazzled the eye. The half of the pure pink Stefani diamond King
Christos had bequeathed to his son, Aegeus, and to the kingdom
of Aristo, dominated the crown.
“Beautiful,” Maria said softly.
Aegeus nodded. “Yes,” he said brusquely, and reached for the
crown.
“Wait,” Maria said quickly, pulling it back.
He looked up. The vein in his forehead looked even darker
than before. “You forget yourself, Ms. Santos.”
“I meant…Wait. Please, Your Majesty.”
“For what? You’ve seen what you came to see.”
“Iwant a closer look at the pink diamond, sir.To check its shade
against…” Maria took a small silk bag from the leather tote she
always carried when handling gems. She opened it, and the pair
of pink diamonds, one of which would become the centerpiece of
Tia’s necklace, tumbled onto the table. “To check it against these.”
The king hardly looked at the stones. “Either will match. The
colors are the same.”
Maria shook her head. “Actually, they’re not.”
“Of course they are. And your five minutes are—”
But Maria had stopped listening. A trickle of ice water seemed
to slip down her spine. She looked at the single light bulb in its
overhead socket.
“Is there…?” She cleared her throat. “Is there a way to get
more light in this room, sir?”
“No.”
142 BILLIONAIRE PRINCE, PREGNANT MISTRESS
“Surely we could take the crown into the display room?”
“Surely we could not,” Aegeus said coldly. “And I repeat, your
time is— What are you doing?”
Maria’s hands were trembling but she tried to stay calm. She
put the pair of pink diamonds back in their bag, put the bag in
her tote and took out a small flashlight and a jeweler’s loupe.
Quickly, she put the loupe to her eye and turned on the flashlight.
“Ms. Santos!” The king’s voice was sharp. “The Aristan
diamond is priceless. I do not want you poking at it and picking
at it and—”
“It’s a fake!” Her words seemed to explode in the confines of
the small room. She looked up, horrified. “This half of the Stefani
diamond. What’s supposed to be the Stefani diamond. It isn’t a
diamond at all.”
The king’s already pale face went paper-white. He shot to his
feet. “Give me the crown!”
“Sir. The stone is a fake. Cubic zirconium. Or something else.
It’s an excellent forgery but…” God, she was shaking like a
woman with a high fever! “Your Majesty. I have some tools in
my workshop. I can do some tests but I am sure—”
“Give me the crown!”Aegeus roared. He snatched it from her
and stuffed it into the velvet bag, but suddenly his eyes grewwide
and his face lost what little color it had.A strangled sound broke
from his throat; he clapped his hand to his heart, the bag fell on
the table and the king tumbled back into his chair.
Maria leaped to her feet, ran to the door and flung it open.
“Help!” she shouted. “Please, someone help!The king’s collapsed!”
At once, the seemingly empty corridor swarmed with people.
Maria fell back against the wall. Someone scooped everything
from the table—the loupe, the flashlight and the velvet bag—
dumped them into her leather tote, thrust the tote at her, then
grasped her arm, hurried her out of the palace and to Alex’s
waiting limousine.
It wasn’t until she was back at the guesthouse that she realized
the crown of Aristo had gone home with her.
* * *
SANDRA MARTON 143
What did you do when you had absconded with a royal crown?
Maria sat at herworkbench, staring blindly at the crown as she
tried to come to grips with all that had happened today. The
wrenching realization that she was pregnant. The horrifying discovery
that the half of the Stefani diamond in the Aristan crown
was not a diamond at all and then, the king’s collapse.
Was Aegeus dead? Had her news killed him?
She’d phoned the palace. Useless. She had the private telephone
number of the queen’s personal secretary but reached only
her voice mail. Desperate for diversion, she’d filled the time
running tests on the pink stone in the crown, praying all the
while that her initial judgment had been wrong.
She’d done a dozen tests, everything from the silly—did the
stone fog when she blew on it?—to the absolutely, completely
scientific.
She’d used an electronic tool called a diamond tester. She’d
brought it out last, as if by holding off she could avoid the truth.
The tester had been one of the things she’d brought with her from
NewYork; she hadn’t even been aware she had it with her until now.
The thing was a complex piece of equipment but it was simple
to operate. Turn it on, touch the probe at one end of it to a stone.
If the stonewas a real diamond, a green light came on. If itwasn’t…
If it wasn’t, nothing happened.
Nothing had happened, half a dozen times.
Maybe the tester wasn’t working. That had been her hope.
So she’d touched the probe to every white diamond in the
crown. To the diamonds in Tia’s almost-completed necklace. To
the two big pink stones she’d taken to the palace.
The green light blinked on each time.
Then she’d touched it to the pink stone in the Aristan crown.
Please, she’d prayed, please let the green light come on.
It didn’t.
The stone was a brilliant, beautiful fake. It would fool
anybody. Anybody but an expert.
Still, maybe she was wrong. Maybe she’d missed something.
144 BILLIONAIRE PRINCE, PREGNANT MISTRESS
Was there a test she’d forgotten? Anything was possible, she told
herself, and reached for the phone.
Far across the ocean, Joaquin answered on the first ring.
“Maria,” he said happily, on hearing her voice. “¿Como se va?
Sela was just saying—”
“Joaquin. I need your help.”
He was not a GG—a Graduate Gemologist—as she was. The
degree had cost her a small fortune; shewas still carrying the debt.
But his depth and breadth of knowledge was excellent, and she
knewshe could trust him with this devastating news. She told him
what she’d discovered. Described the tests she’d run. Their conversation
grew complex, touched on things like heating, magnification,
trigons and dodecahedral surfaces of octahedral crystal
formations and then, finally, she took a deep breath and told him
she’d used a diamond tester.And the stone had failed that final test.
“You’re sure the tester is working properly?”
“I checked the battery. And it gave a green light, literally, to
a couple of dozen diamonds, pink and white.”
“But not this one.”
“No,” Maria said, “not this one.”
Joaquin’s sigh drifted through the telephone. “I don’t envy you,
chica.You are about to be the bearer of very bad news for someone.”
She gave a sad little laugh. “I’m afraid I already am.”
“Call me if you need me. Sela says to tell you she can do
without me for a few days. We both love you, you know that.”
She smiled. “Doing without you, even for a few days, is impossible.
I love you, too, Joaquin. With all my—”
“How cozy.”
Maria spun around. Alexandros stood in the doorway, arms
folded, legs apart, face stony and cold.
“Alexandros! I didn’t hear you come in.”
“No. Obviously not. Don’t let me interrupt you, Maria. Not
when you’re in the middle of an obviously important call.”
She said a quick “goodbye” to Joaquin and hung up the phone.
Then she slid from the stool and went to her lover. He didn’tmove.
Didn’t smile. Didn’t react at all when she put her hand on his arm.
SANDRA MARTON 145
“Your father—”
“I know all about my father.”
“Is he—is he—”
“He’s in the hospital. He had a heart attack.” Alex’s mouth
narrowed. “Thanks to you.”
“I never meant—”
“What did you say to him? Did you perhaps tell him you were
sleeping with me even though you miss your lover in NewYork?”
His mouth twisted. “No. Why would you do that when you’ve
been so careful to hide that information from me?”
“Alexandros. Listen to me. I don’t have—”
“Liar!” He caught her by the shoulders, his hands rough on
her tender flesh, and drewher to her toes, just as he had after their
first night together. “It’s the same man you were talking to that
morning three months ago.” When she said nothing, his face
contorted. “Answer me, damn you! Admit it.”
“I was talking with Joaquin, yes. But—”
“Can’t you do without him for another few days?”
“Alexandros.” Her voice broke. “You’re wrong about him.”
“I was wrong about you, you mean.”
“I told you, Joaquin works for me. He’s married.”
“What would that matter to a woman like you?”
Maria felt the insult like a knife to the heart. She jerked free
of his hands, her face white, eyes glittering with tears.
“I don’t deserve that,” she whispered.
Yes, he thought, she did. She deserved that and more. He had
taken her to his bed. Held her in his arms as she slept. Awakened
her with his kisses. He had shared his life with her these past weeks.
Fool that he was, he’d come to—to care for her. To want her more
than he’d ever wanted anything or anyone in his entire life.
He’d even imagined—he’d stupidly imagined he might keep
her with him after her work here was over.
He turned away. Composed himself. She was just another
woman. More beautiful, perhaps. More intelligent. More fun. In
the end, though, she was the same as all the others. She was with
him because of who he was. Because of the power he wielded.
146 BILLIONAIRE PRINCE, PREGNANT MISTRESS
Because hewas a prince, not a man. He had to remember that.
She was his mistress, bought and paid for. She was not his
lover; she was not in his bed of her own free will but because he
had demanded her presence there.
He took a breath and looked at her. “What did you say to my
father?” His voice was cold. “He was fine at the start of his
meeting with you.”
“He wasn’t. He looked ill.”
“Answer the question.What did you do to make him collapse?”
Maria stared at Alex. He was looking at her as he had not done
in weeks, as if he were an autocrat and she were his to command.
His expression radiated scorn—and maybe she deserved it. She’d
slept with a man who’d made it clear he wanted her sexually, not
any other way.
And she’d fallen in love with him.
Wasn’t she repeating a pattern for which she’d vilified her
mother—up to and including the shame of becoming pregnant?
God. Oh, God! How had she let this happen? And what would
she do next? End the pregnancy? Have the baby? Raise it, alone,
as her mother had raised her? Because it was only in fairy tales
that the handsome prince married the beautiful commoner and
lived with her happily ever after.
“I’m waiting, Maria.”
She wrapped her arms around herself. Lifted her chin. Forced
herself to meet Alex’s steely gaze without flinching.
“I told him something about the Aristan crown.”
“And?”
“And, it upset him. I’m sorry for that but I was—I was
shocked myself and I just blurted it out—”
“Blurted out what? I’m not in the mood for games, Maria.”
Maria swallowed dryly. Her lover was a prince of the house
of Karedes. He had to know the truth.
“I told him—I told him the half of the Stefani diamond in the
crown wasn’t real.”
For a long moment, nothing happened. Then Alex laughed.
The sound startled her.
SANDRA MARTON 147
“You told the king that a stone that is beyond price wasn’t
real?” His laughter ended as quickly as it had begun. “And he
called you, what? A liar? A fool? An idiot? Or all three?”
“It isn’t real,” Maria said quietly. “It’s an excellent fake—but
a fake, nevertheless.”
Alex’s face darkened. “He should have had you thrown out
for spouting such nonsense!”
“Listen to me, Alex.”
“No, glyka mou, you listen to me! I don’t know what you
thought to accomplish with such a lie but—”
“The stone’s counterfeit!” Maria grabbed the crown from the
workbench along with a stack of papers and shoved all of it into
his hands. “Here’s the crown.”
“You took it out of the palace?—”
“I didn’t plan to take it but… Never mind the details. Look at
my notes. I ran endless tests. That’s why I phoned Joaquin, to see
if maybe, just maybe therewas something I missed. Therewasn’t.
The Aristan pink diamond isn’t a diamond at all!”
Alex stared at her. Then he began leafing through the papers,
quickly at first and then, as he began to absorb what she’d written,
more and more slowly. He stared at the crown. At the papers.
Finally, he looked up.
“I don’t understand. Who would have done this? And how?
The crown’s been in the vault for years.”
Maria spread her hands. “I have no answers. I only know the
diamond is a fake.”
Alex put down the papers and the crown, and ran a hand
through his hair. “You’re sure? There’s no possibility of error?”
“I’m a Graduate Gemologist,” she said softly. “I’ve appraised
lots and lots of diamonds. I even did some work with an insurance
company that involved fraud and a diamond that would
have been worth millions, had it been real.” She paused. “I
phoned Joaquin because he’s knowledgeable. And completely
trustworthy.”
Alex’s mouth thinned. “I’ll just bet he is.”
“Damn it, stop being a fool! I phoned him that morning in
148 BILLIONAIRE PRINCE, PREGNANT MISTRESS
your apartment to tell him I thought I had a good shot at winning
the competition because I knew how much it mattered to him
and his wife. And I called him now to pick his brain. He’s not
my lover. He never has been. He’s married to my best friend and
he’s my friend, too. I can trust him to keep quiet about this—or
am I wrong, thinking you don’t want the citizens of Aristo
learning the truth about the diamond from the front pages of the
world’s newspapers?”
A muscle flickered in Alex’s jaw. She was right about the need
for discretion. The diamond was priceless, not only as a stone
but as a symbol. No Aristan ruler could ever be crowned without
it. There was also his grandfather’s pronouncement, what
everyone called King Christos’s Legacy, the pledge that both
halves of the Stefani diamond would have to be joined together
in the crown of Adamas if ever the two kingdoms, Calista and
Aristo, were to be reunited.
And then, he thought, looking at Maria, then there was
Maria herself.
Maria, who had brought him the kind of joy he’d never
expected to find. What he’d told himself a little while ago was a
lie. She’d come to Aristo because he’d forced her to do so, yes,
but that was in the past. She was here now because it was what
they both wanted. He couldn’t imagine ending the day without
sharing a few quiet moments with her as they stood in each
other’s arms, watching the sun set over his beloved island.
Couldn’t imagine opening his eyes in the morning and not
finding her in his arms again.
As for Joaquin… He’d seen his Maria with him but, really, what
had he seen?A man putting his arms around a woman.A kiss, but
were either the embrace or the kiss those of lovers? Had she lifted
her face to Joaquin as she lifted hers to him? Had she drawn
Joaquin’s head down to hers? Had anything about that kiss held
the heat, the power of what happened between his Maria and him?
God, hewas a fool.Accusing her of things he knew, in his heart,
were not true. Things she would never do. He had to tell her what
she’d come to mean to him, that he didn’twant her to leave him…
SANDRA MARTON 149
“I only wish,” she said brokenly, “I just wish I’d broken the
news to your father differently. Perhaps, if I had—”
“It’s all right, glyka mou.”
“No. It isn’t. I upset him. His heart—”
“His heart is undamaged. He’s at the hospital, yes, but he’s
awake and alert.”
“Thank God,” she said, and then she began to weep.
“Ah, sweetheart.”Alex gathered her into his arms. “Don’t cry.”
She wept harder, her face pressed against his shoulder. He
could feel her tears dampening his shirt.
“Forgive me for blaming you for what happened. Discovering
the stone is fake must have been terrible.”
Maria lifted her face to his. “It was horrible. Horrible, Alexandros!
I couldn’t believe it. That was why I called Joaquin—”
“I spoke before I thought,” he said gruffly, framing her face
between his hands. “An old failing, I’m afraid. Ask my brothers.
Or my sisters.” He smiled. “They’ll tell you the same thing. I hear
something, I get upset, I react.” He clasped her chin, lifted her
mouth to his and kissed her. “Will you forgive me?”
Their eyes met, his dark with anguish, hers bright with tears.
Would she forgive him? How could she do anything else? She
loved this man with all her heart. He had been through an awful
shock about his father. She could grant him some leeway,
couldn’t she?
And she carried his child.
She had to tell him. She knew she did. They had created this
tiny life together. No matter what the consequences, Alexandros
had the right to know. She was not her mother and he was not a
clone of her father.
“Maria? Please, sweetheart, say you’ll forgive me.”
“You know I will,” she said softly, smiling through her tears.
Alex let out a long breath. “Glyka mou.We must talk.About us.”
“Yes. We do.”
“But not now.” He held her closer. “The next days are going
to be hectic. I’ll have to tell my family about the Stefani diamond.
150 BILLIONAIRE PRINCE, PREGNANT MISTRESS
We’ll have to meet with the council and decide how to handle
this. And there’s my mother’s birthday…”
“Can you postpone the celebration?”
“My father has already said it must go on as scheduled.”
“But if he’s ill…”
“This is a national celebration, sweetheart. Royal responsibility
to the people comes before everything else.” He frowned. “And
nowthat I knowthis about the diamond, Iwonder ifmyfather isn’t
concerned that his illness should not seem too important.You see,
if something should happen to him, if a new king had to be
crowned… That could not happen unless the real diamond were
found and placed in the crown. Do you understand?”
Maria nodded. Like most little girls, she’d loved fairy tales.
Now she knew, first-hand, that real kings and queens and princes
and princesses did not live such easy lives.
That fairy tales didn’t always end happily, she thought, and a
shudder went through her.
“What is it, agapoula mou?”
“Nothing,” she said quickly. “Just—I’m just thinking of how
busy everyone will be the next few days.”
“We’ll manage. I, especially, because I’ll have you beside me.”
Alex bent to her and kissed her. Whispered soft words against
her lips. Her arms crept around his neck. Now, she told herself.
Never mind that there’s no time for real talking. Let him ask you
to stay with him, and you can tell him about the baby—
His cell phone rang. He blanched as he grabbed it from his
pocket.
“Ne?” he said brusquely.
But it wasn’t the hospital, it was Andreas. The conversation
was brief. When it ended, Alex drew her against him.
“I can’t stay, sweetheart. I must meet with Sebastian and
Andreas. There are many things to discuss, and now is as good
a time as any to tell them about the diamond.”
She nodded. “Tell them, too, how sorry I am.”
“You have nothing to be sorry for, glyka mou.” His lips curved
in a smile. “But if you feel you must show contrition for some
SANDRA MARTON 151
152 BILLIONAIRE PRINCE, PREGNANT MISTRESS
imagined misdeed, I’ll consider letting you find creative ways
to do so later on.”
She laughed and kissed him, and when he whispered something
that made her blush, she kissed him again.
“Tonight,” she promised.
He gathered up the papers and the Aristan crown; he put his
arm around her as they walked to the door.
“Tonight,” he said softly.
But one night became another and then another. The mystery
of the diamond, the king’s illness, the birthday celebration on the
horizon… Alex was caught up in the politics of the palace.
There was no time for anything else.
CHAPTER TWELVE
THE day of the queen’s birthday celebration was an anomaly.
It was winter, when cool winds and rain often lashed Aristo,
but this day dawned bright and warm.
Alex hardly noticed.Hehad not been home since he’d left Maria
in the guesthouse. He’d returned the crown to the display case in
the vault and, ever since, he’d been closeted with his brothers.
They were trying to come up with answers. Where was the
missing diamond?Whohad stolen it?When?Howcould the switch
have gone unnoticed? Where did they start searching for the real
stone? Most pressing of all, how could they keep it all a secret?
And it had to be a secret. They could not permit word to get
out that the stone was gone.
On the simplest level, news like that would be humiliating.
Far more unsettling were the possible political consequences.
What if a Calistan sheikh somehow gained control of the
diamond? Could he then twist the true meaning of King
Christos’s legacy, join the Aristan stone to the one in the Crown
of Calista, and claim the right to rule both kingdoms?
It was a real possibility, one that might well destroy Aristo.
Hemissed Maria terribly. Her smile. Her quiet strength.The feel
of her in his arms.Hephoned her whenever he could: even the sound
of her soft voice was an oasis of calm in the middle of a storm.
“I miss you, glyka mou,” he told her softly.
She missed him, too. Terribly. But she understood that he was
154 BILLIONAIRE PRINCE, PREGNANT MISTRESS
needed at the palace. Sometimes, she could forget her lover was
a prince. Now, she couldn’t escape it. So, rather than burden him
with her own feelings, she did what she thought was right. She
said she missed him, too, but she was busy.
“Even if you were here,Alexandros, I couldn’t spend time with
you. I have last-minute work to do on your mother’s necklace.”
“Oh,” he said, just that one word, but he sounded disappointed.
She almost told him she was lying, that she missed him
so badly she ached, that if he came through the door she’d toss
everything aside and run into his arms…
But the last thing he needed now was a clinging female. Her
Alex, along with Sebastian and Andreas, were like jugglers
trying to keep a dozen balls in the air. Elissa had just arrived
home. She and Kitty were busy helping their mother get ready
for the party.
The king had come home from the hospital against the advice
of his doctors. The heart attack had not done any damage, true,
but they wanted other tests. Nonsense, said Aegeus. There were
affairs of state to deal with. Tia’s birthday. All the media attention
the celebration had brought. Scores of foreign dignitaries.
“I am fine,” he insisted.
Was he? The brothers thought their father looked ill.
“Actually,” Sebastian said, “he looks like hell.”
It was an accurate assessment. The king was pale. He seemed
to have shrunk in size and there was a constant sheen of sweat
on his forehead. And why did he never mention the missing
diamond? That seemed strangest of all.
“If we can just get through the celebration tonight…” Alex
said, and they all agreed. Get through tonight and then they could
institute a real if subtle search for the missing stone.
Alex was going home to shower and change. “We’ll have
half an hour alone, sweetheart,” he said when he phoned Maria,
“but we can make the most of that half hour.” He told her how
they’d do that, in explicit detail, and she gave a sexy little sigh
and said she’d be waiting.
Smiling, he flipped his cell phone shut. He needed that thirty
SANDRA MARTON 155
minutes, not just to make love to her but to tell her what he’d started
to tell her three days ago. What he should have told her weeks ago.
He didn’t want her to leave him.
Once she gave the necklace to the king, once the king presented
it to the queen, Maria would go back to New York.
He could not imagine letting that happen.
They were at the start of their relationship, not the end. In the
last month, she had become part of him. She was—she was everything
to him. Sometimes, when he held her close, he wanted
to tell her—to tell her—
“Alex?” Andreas was hurrying toward him. “Change in plans.
Last-minute stuff. Sebastian’s meeting with that guy from the
BBC, I’m going to talk to CNN. Kitty’s doing a piece with The New
York Times. Lissa was going to deal with Newsweek but Mother
needs her, something about the flowers. Can you take her spot?”
Alex looked at his watch. “I have to get home, Andreas.”
“You mean,” his brother said, smiling, “youwant to see Maria.”
“No, of course not. It’s just that my tux is at home…” Alex
sighed. “You’re right. I do.”
“Well, you’ll see her soon enough. The party starts in a couple
of hours. Let your driver pick up your tux, okay? If you don’t take
over for Lissa, we’ll be up the creek without a paddle.”
Alex hesitated, but what choice was there? He couldn’t walk
away from his duty, no matter what his own needs. He hoped
Maria would understand.
She did more than understand. She said that it was just as well,
she still had to do her nails and her hair. He said fine, he was glad
it had all worked out, but he was lying.
What he’dwanted her to saywas that she’d been longing for him.
That it was agony to know they would not have half an hour alone.
Hehad noway of knowing that Mariawas lying, too. She’d been
counting the hours untilAlex came to her, but she couldn’t tell him
that. She needed the feel of his arms around her.And then therewas
her pregnancy. She had to find the right time to tell him about it.
But when?
He was, after all, a man with all the responsibilities of a life
completely different from hers. He might see her as an exciting
lover but that was all she was, all she ever could be…
Her throat tightened.
Maybe she wouldn’t tell him about the baby. Not just yet,
anyway.
Not until the time was right.
The evening started with a flourish.
A dozen royal heralds played a trumpet fanfare at the top of
the marble steps that led into the huge ballroom. A velvet curtain
at the far end was drawn back and the queen swept in on the
king’s arm. The hundreds of guests smiled and applauded her
arrival. Every eye was on the radiant Tia.
Every eye but Alex’s.
He was waiting at the opposite end of the enormous room,
waiting and watching for Maria. Where was she?
“Alexandros,” a voice whispered, and he turned and there she
was, standing behind him, so gorgeous in a silk gown the color
of fine sherry, her dark hair tumbling down her back in a profusion
ofwaves and curls accented with tiny ruby and diamond stars
he’d had sent to her, that the sight of her almost stopped his heart.
He didn’t think, didn’t hesitate but took her hands, drew her
through the crowd and out to the terrace, took her in his arms and
kissed her.
She melted against him.
“Maria,” he said softly, “kardoula mou, you are the most
beautiful woman in the world.”
Her mouth curved against his. “And you, my prince, are the
most handsome man on the planet.”
He kissed her again. “I hoped you’d be here before the celebration
started.”
“The car,” she said, on a little laugh. “We had a flat tire. Don’t
let on that you know, Alex. Poor Alastor felt awful.”
“As he should,” Alex said, but he smiled. “Never mind.
You’re here now. That’s what matters. Did you give the necklace
to my father?”
156 BILLIONAIRE PRINCE, PREGNANT MISTRESS
Maria nodded. “He seemed pleased with it. He said he’ll
give it to your mother at midnight.” She hesitated. “Is he all
right? He looks—”
“Terrible. I know. We tried to convince him to cancel but he
refused.” Alex gathered her closer against him. “Let’s not talk
about that,” he said softly. “Not when I have something important
to discuss with you.”
Now was the time to say that she did, too.
“Maria.” Gently, he brushed a curl from her forehead. “I know
you’re supposed to… I mean, I know we agreed you would…”
Alex groaned. “I’m making a mess of this, glyka mou. What I’m
trying to say is—”
“Your Highness! Prince Alexandros!”
An equerry was running toward them. Alex knew, before the
man said another word, that the news was of his father.
“The king?”
The equerry nodded. “He’s been taken ill, sir.”
Alex ran into the ballroom. Maria hiked up her skirt and ran
at his side.
“Where is he?”
“The throne room, sir. There’s a helicopter on its way. Your
Highness?” The equerry, running with them, caught Alex by the
sleeve just before they reached the throne room. The simple
actionwas so unprecedented that it startled even Maria. “The king
wishes to see Ms. Santos.” He swallowed audibly. “Alone.”
“Me?” Maria said, in amazement. “That can’t be.”
The Karedes family was gathered outside the closed doors of
the throne room, faces white and puzzled. When Maria hesitated,
the queen motioned her forward.
“My husband wants to see you, Ms. Santos.” Tia bit her lip.
“Please. I don’t think there’s time to waste.”
“Go on,” Alex said softly, and touched his hand to her cheek.
The doors closed behind her with an audible click.
This was Maria’s first visit to the throne room. It was not as
big as she’d imagined, the size, perhaps, of half her loft, but it
SANDRA MARTON 157
was elegant. A red carpet stretched toward a pair of ornate chairs
that stood on a raised platform but the chairs—presumably, the
thrones—were empty.
“Here,” a weak voice said.
The king was alone. He lay on a crimson velvet sofa, head
elevated on a blue silk pillow.
Maria moved slowly toward him. Her heart thumped. He’s
dying, she thought, and, as if he’d read her mind, Aegeus struggled
up against the pillow.
“I am not dead yet, Ms. Santos. Come forward.”
“Your Majesty. Your family is outside. Surely, you want to see
them—”
“You were not supposed to learn that the diamond in the
crown is false.”
Maria caught her breath. “You knew?”
The king’s face contorted. He groaned and Maria swung
toward the door to call for help but Aegeus’s fingers wrapped
around her wrist with the steely grip of command.
“My son is in love with you.”
She stared at him. “What?”
“Alexandros loves you, Ms. Santos. I’m not sure he knows it
yet, but he does.” He drew a rasping breath. “But you must not
return that love.”
Maria shook her head. “Your Majesty. Please. You’re very
sick—”
“All the more reason for you to pay attention to what I say,”
he said, a touch of the old sharpness edging hiswords. “You must
understand that there is no room in a royal’s life for love.”
“Sir. This is hardly the time—”
“A prince is not born to his mother or father, Ms. Santos, he
is born to his nation and his people. His life, from birth, is one
of responsibility. Commitment. Obligation.” Aegeus took another
labored breath. “Someday, my sons will marry. They will marry
young women born of blood as royal as theirs, young women
who understand what is expected of them.”
Maria sank to her knees beside the sofa. She could feel the
158 BILLIONAIRE PRINCE, PREGNANT MISTRESS
sting of tears in her eyes and she blinked furiously to keep them
from falling.
“I love your son,” she whispered. “And I understand he has
responsibilities. I can help him shoulder them. I can step back
when I must.”
“If you truly love him, you will give him up.”
“No. No! You can’t ask that of me. Or of him. If Alexandros
loves me—”
“His duty is to his people. To his mother. To me. A prince who
falls in love with the wrong woman can only destroy her. He can
only destroy his nation and himself. Maria. If you love my son
as you say you do, you will leave him. And you will not tell him
the reason. Alexandros must never know you love him, or that
you gave him up because you love him. You must walk away
from him, from his life, and never look back.”
Tears streamed down Maria’s face.
“You ask too much of me,” she said. “You have no right!”
“I love my country and my people. And though you may not
think so, I love my children.” The king took a long, agonizing
breath. “Alex thinks you willmake him happy but youwon’t, Maria.
Your love can only hurt him.You must, you must, set him free.”
“Your Majesty—”
The king jerked upright. His hand went to his throat; his
breath rattled though a mouth gone wide, gasping for air.
Maria sprang to her feet.
“Help,” she shouted.
“Maria,” Aegeus whispered hoarsely.
“Someone, help—”
The door swung open. Footsteps clattered against the marble
floor. And, as they did, Aegeus grabbed Maria’s hand again.
“Promise me,” he said fiercely. “Swear that you will do what
you know you must.”
Weeping, Maria stared at the king’s stricken face—and knew
he was right. She could not share Alexandros’s life. He was a
prince and she—she was nobody.
“I swear,” she said.
SANDRA MARTON 159
160 BILLIONAIRE PRINCE, PREGNANT MISTRESS
A smile pulled Aegeus’s lips back from his teeth—and then he
fell back against the pillows. His family surrounded him.The queen
sank to the floor beside him, took his hand and began to weep.
“He’s gone,” she said, “he’s gone!”
Alex gently drew her to her feet. Sebastian put his arm around
her. Andreas touched her shoulder. Kitty and Lissa bent over their
father and sobbed.
And Maria did the only thing she could. The thing Aegeus had
asked of her. The promise she had made him that she knew, in
her heart of hearts, was right.
She slipped from the room, from the palace.
From Alexandros’s life.
CHAPTER THIRTEEN
A MONARCH’S death left behind a void that must be filled quickly
for the safety and stability of the kingdom and its people.
At first, all was confusion.
Despite Aegeus’s illness, his death had been sudden. The
king’s private physicians tried every possible means to revive him
but to no avail. The Karedes family clustered around the king’s
lifeless body; the palace, filled with guests for the queen’s
birthday celebration, buzzed with rumors. Andreas comforted his
sisters. Sebastian, who as eldest son would, within hours, be
named the Prince Regent, was immediately surrounded by guards
whose duty it was to protect him, especially in times of turmoil.
Alex held his mother in his arms.
Through it all—the loss of his father, his mother’s tears, his
sister’s sobs, the stunned reactions of his brothers and his own
shock—through all that, Alex found himself looking over the
heads of those who’d crowded into the room. Where was Maria?
He needed her. And, surely, she needed him. She’d been alone
with his father at the moment of his death.
She needed his comfort. His arms.And he, God, he needed her.
A reporter and a couple of photographers had somehow
slipped into the room; two of the guards were hustling them out.
Had those guards, in error, forced Maria aside?
He was desperate to find her but Tia was distraught. He
couldn’t leave her, not until she was calmer. He told himself not
162 BILLIONAIRE PRINCE, PREGNANT MISTRESS
to worry. His Maria was smart. She was resourceful. She’d find
his car, have his driver take her home. Or she’d wait for him in
a quiet corner of the palace.
Soon, he’d be alone with her. And he’d tell her what he now
knew had been in his heart for weeks. He loved her. He adored
her. He could not imagine life without her.
He didn’t just want her to stay here, on Aristo, as his lover.
He wanted her to become his wife.
One thing about death, he thought as he led his mother from
the room. It had a profound way of making a man see what
really mattered.
And what mattered, the only thing that mattered, was Maria.
In the face of a nation’s grief and loss, tradition became its solace.
Aegeus would lie in state for three days. The Accession
Council would meet to formally name Sebastian the Prince
Regent, though by tradition coupled with the decades-old decree
of Christos, there could be no coronation of him as king until the
missing half of the Stefani diamond was returned to the Aristan
crown. The Privy Council would meet, too, so its members could
certify the succession declaration.
Andreas took on the coordination of those meetings.
Sebastian immersed himself in policy conferences. It fell to
Alex to finalize plans for the royal funeral. And yet, as he raced
home just before dawn, his thoughts were not on any of those
things. He was consumed by worries over something far more
important.
Maria.
She hadn’t beenwaiting for him in the palace, not in the public
rooms or in the royal apartments. His driver was waiting, in the
courtyard, and in response toAlex’s questions the man could only
shake his head and say that he had not seen Ms. Santos.
Alex checked his cell phone. Again. He’d already done that
a dozen times but maybe, now, she’d left a message… She hadn’t.
He’d phoned her endlessly and been connected to her voice mail,
where he’d gone from leaving messages telling her he would
SANDRA MARTON 163
The Five-Letter Womanr
:
She was a woman of mean understanding,
Little information and uncertain temper.
Jane Austen
Historically the most effective means to rebuke any woman
was to disparage her virtue (that or possibly her fashion
sense). Nowadays, un-virtuous and unladylike are probably
as useless as insults go as un-gentlemanly. Yet however
ubiquitous its use, we can agree that calling a disreputable
female a bitch (or even puppy’s mama) is not only
common, but an insult to female dogs. Harpy,
harridan, slattern, or shrew may be vintage, but
they are just pithy enough for general reproach
of shrill, hateful behavior. When faced with an
irredeemably cantankerous woman,
she may well be the Devil’s Sister.
(If she appears to find this in any way
complimentary, a keen sense of self
preservation might suggest one run
like a cheap pair of pantyhose.)
carping, cavil, censure, denunciation, disparagement,
16
rFoul Sluts
Even if the succubus
that one’s brother intends
to marry is a fornicatress
that has seen
more pricks than a
dartboard, we encourage
one not to refer to
her as a slut, tramp,
hussy, trollop, roundheeled
floozy, or dirtylegged
Jezebel. One
might get away with
“she’s been around the
block more times than
the Good Humor man”
to others, but unless he
actually asks your opinion,
one might do well
to refrain from comment
at all.
Other analogies for that
woman who has been
laid on every flat rock
in three counties include
the town pump
or any noun that can
I can remember
when the air was clean
and sex was dirty.
17
be ridden: bicycle, hobby horse, barber’s chair, ferry,
hackney, taxi, etc. A badger is a loose woman who is particularly
ill-scented.
Disclaimer: This information is offered only for elucidative
purposes.
VFYI: If one believes that a woman is of accommodating
morals and decides to say so publicly, one has
bewhored her (or, depending on one’s ‘hood, possibly
beho-ed her). Be certain that she doesn’t mind
the advertisement or have your affairs in order, for it
is said: “Hell hath no fury like pussy with a pistol.”
Dog City
If while mentally cruising some parallel
universe, one believes it a good
idea to slander a masculine woman,
at least have the good sense to avoid
calling her a diesel-dyke or hell pig.
Virago, beldame, trolleymog, daggletail,
or buffarilla mean precisely
the same thing and their relative obscurity
may offer one just enough
time to elude being beaten to a pulp.
VNOTE: We have been told