MegaLiving!: 30 days to a perfect life
ISBN 0-9698225-0-2
1. Success - Psychological aspects
I. Title
BF637. S8S53 1994 158’ . 1 C94-931043-3
Third Printing March 1995
Copy editing by Bill Belfontaine
Typesetting and text design by Karen Petherick
Cover photos by Keith Penner
Graphics by Rod Brandt
Printed and Manufactured in Canada
MegaLiving! is a trademark of the Haunsla Corporation.
The author has made every effort to provide an authoritative study on
this subject but is not providing any form of professional advice. It is
highly recommended that the reader seek the assistance of a trained
medical professional where there are any concerns as to a new program
aimed at physical improvement and excellence.
iv
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
Dedicated to my wonderful wife Alka for her
affection, to my brother Sanjay and his wife Susan for
their inspiration and to my parents, Shiv and Shashi
Sharma for showing me the way to MegaLiving!
For my son Colby.
v
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
Someone has well said, “Success is a journey, not a
destination.” Happiness is to be found along the way, not at
the end of the road, for then the journey is over and it is
too late. Today, this hour, this minute is the day, the hour,
the minute for each of us to sense the fact that life is good,
with all its trials and troubles and perhaps more interesting
because of them.
Robert R. Updegraff
vi
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Preface by Robin Sharma . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .viii
PART I: THE MEGALIVING! PHILOSOPHY
Chapter One : MegaLiving! Achieving Mastery of the Mind, Body and Character
i) The Ultimate Challenge . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
ii) The Power of Limitless Living . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
iii) The Promise of MegaLiving! . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
iv) Excelling with the Program and Igniting Your Life . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
Chapter Two : Your Mind and its Unlimited Potential
i) Your Commitment to Self-Mastery: Kaizen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
ii) The Nature of the Mind: The Ultimate Superpower . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
iii) Discipline and Willpower: The Golden Keys . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
iv) The FeelGood Principle and Beliefs: How to Unleash Vitality . . . . . . . . . 29
v) MegaThinking and the Enchantment of Positivity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
vi) The Magic of Goals: Your Visions of Excellence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .34
Chapter Three : Your Body: Achieving Physical Mastery
i) The Power of Exercise: Your Fountain of Youth . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
ii) The Magic of Diet: Eating Your Way to Excellence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
iii) 5 Ancient Secrets of the East for Longevity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
Chapter Four : Your Character: Attaining Public Excellence and Private Victory
i) The Pleasures of Proactivity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 67
ii) You are Unstoppable: Momentum on the Path to Mastery . . . . . . . . . . . . 70
iii) Developing a Mission Statement for Self-Mastery . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 71
iv) How to Attract Wealth & Prosperity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 73
v) The Lost Art of Effective Personal Management . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 76
vi) The 8 Keys to the Path of Mastery . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 80
PART II: THE 200 POWERFUL MASTER SECRETS FOR MEGALIVING! . . . . . . 89
PART III: THE MEGALIVING! 30 DAY PROGRAM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 127
PART IV: THE MEGALIVING! SUCCESSLOG . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .159
vii
viii MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
Preface
This Revolutionary Book Will Change Your Life!
WE ALL have the potential for a Perfect Life. We all have the
potential to achieve great things and live a life filled with joy,
accomplishment and pure bliss. In some of us, this potential is
slumbering deep inside, waiting only to be tapped and tested. The
most noble of pursuits is to ignite this fire for personal mastery and life
excellence. This book is the only tool you will ever need to do this.
There is a story of a weary traveller who met a wise sage on a
mountain path high in the Himalayas. The traveller asked the old man
where he could find the path which would lead him to the top of the
mountain, his ultimate destination. The sage thought for a moment
and then replied: “simply make certain that every single step is in the
direction of the mountain top and you will get there.”
When your every thought and your every action is directed to
your ultimate life goals, you become unstoppable and assured of great
success and happiness. When you cultivate your mind, body and
character, your life takes on powerful dimensions that you never
thought possible. This book will provide you with all that you need to
put far more living into your life.
Part I of MegaLiving! contains the leading principles of personal
mastery and successful living. Part II will reveal to you the 200 Master
Secrets for making your life a magical dream while Part III contains the
revolutionary 30 Day Program to a Perfect Life. This book will do
wonders for you. Read it, apply it and share it. A Perfect Life is yours
for the taking.
Robin S. Sharma, LL.B., LL.M.
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life ix

MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life 1
THE ULTIMATE CHALLENGE
There are people who make things happen. There are people who
watch things happen. And there are people who say, “what
happened?” The MegaLiving! program will quickly make things
happen in every aspect of your life. You will learn the finest strategies
and techniques available to profoundly improve your mind, body and
character. This book will show you, in a very exciting and practical
way, how to put far more living into your life. There is no doubt that
you have within you incredible powers to achieve anything you have
ever dreamed about. Whether it is mental, physical, emotional or
financial mastery that you are seeking, this book will show you
precisely how to get there. MegaLiving!, which contains the
revolutionary results of over ten years of research into the secrets of
successful living offers you a highly effective collection of powerful, yet
easy to use tools that you can use today to live with greater satisfaction,
peace of mind and vitality.
This book contains the master keys to dynamic living. You have
the potential for a perfect life, this is certain. And if you commit
yourself totally to this program for 30 days, you will receive the
following benefits:
Some men see things as they are and say “why”;
I dream of things that never were and say “why not.”
George Bernard Shaw
CHAPTER ONE
MegaLiving! Achieving Mastery of the Mind,
Body & Character
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
i) a deep sense of well-being and happiness
ii) strategies to erase the worry habit and have far more confidence
iii) richer relationships that really last
iv) little-known skills for self-mastery and peak performance
v) an understanding of the powerful Eastern secrets of longevity
vi) boundless energy, enthusiasm and glowing health
vii) greater serenity, tranquility and a radiant personality
viii) tools to achieve lasting prosperity and financial independence
ix) proven techniques to take control of your destiny.
Today is the first day of your perfect life, a life that is yours to
shape into something truly wonderful and lasting. The past does not
determine your future and a change towards personal excellence can
happen in the blink of an eye if you will make a firm commitment to
raising your life to its highest level. This program is for winners -
people who know that their lives are more than their current
circumstances, no matter how successful they might be at this
moment. The fact that you have invested in this program sets you
apart from the vast majority of people and demonstrates that you are
determined to be a peak performer and condition your mind, body and
character for lifelong excellence. Accept the challenge to tap into the
richness of your personal potential and dare to be great!
The First Step
Now shut your eyes, take five deep breaths and picture this scene
taking place many years into the future: you are in an elegant dining
hall, surrounded by those closest to you (who are dressed formally and
beautifully). The candles shimmer on every table and the importance
of the evening wafts through the air like the aromas from the kitchen.
This is your testimonial dinner, an opportunity for the people who
know you best to speak about you as a person, your achievements and
your contributions to those you love and to society in general. Reflect
on what you would like them to say. At this dinner, in the twilight of
your life, do you really want to hear that you have lived in an
uninspired fashion, without passion and without concrete
accomplishment? How would you feel on hearing that you did not
even come close to meeting your mental, physical, financial and
spiritual potential? How would you feel on hearing that your dreams,
2
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
however lofty, went unfulfilled and that you never did supercharge
your life because you were always too busy trying to pay the bills and
so very tired at the end of your day?
With MegaLiving! you are getting a second chance to powerfully
change what you will hear at your testimonial dinner. This book is
your most important wake-up call! If you follow the program daily,
think about it seriously and apply the concepts regularly, making a
decision from the core of your heart to live your life in a magical and
special way, you will hear very sweet sounds at your testimonial dinner.
The guests will happily testify to your exceptional personal
effectiveness, your dynamic personality and compassion for others,
your unique zest for life and your outstanding accomplishments.
Becoming the very best you can be is life’s most noble pursuit. Selfmastery
is the DNA of life mastery. If you want to lead a corporation,
learn to lead yourself first. If you want to manage a team or a family,
learn to manage yourself first. Success on the outside begins with
success on the inside and if you truly want to profoundly improve the
quality of your outer world, you must first improve your inner world.
There is nothing more noble than learning to explore the unlimited
potential of your mind and becoming the very best that you can be.
This is the ultimate challenge of the MegaLiving! mastery program.
Accept it with great energy and welcome yourself to the new reality of
a Perfect Life.
THE POWER OF LIMITLESS LIVING
Deep within man dwell those slumbering powers; powers that would
astonish him, that he never dreamed of possessing; forces that would
revolutionize his life if aroused and put into action.
Orison Sweet Marden
One of the most essential truths to recognize is the fact that the only
limits on what we can achieve in life are those we create and place on
ourselves. Circumstances are the creation of people and not the other
way around. Peak performers, as opposed to the weak performers, have
trained themselves to shape the events of their lives rather than being
shaped by them. Think of the current limitations in your life, the
obstacles preventing you from attaining your dreams and that state of
3
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
bliss you so much desire. You have interpreted each one of these
circumstances to be a roadblock or negative element in your life when
this is not the case.
One of the most fundamental of all strategies for success is also
one of the most simple: there is no such thing as a negative
circumstance, only a circumstance that you may learn from. There are
no mistakes in life, only lessons which will allow you to grow and
advance higher on the path of self-mastery. If you set limits on yourself
such as “I am too young to be a multi-millionaire,” “I am not smart
enough to be a world leader,” “I am too lazy to start my own business”
or, “I don’t have enough money to do this,” your spirit will slowly die
and you will fulfill your negative prophecy. Stop being a prisoner of
your past - become the architect of your future. Every event happens
for a special purpose. Every problem is a special challenge from which
we can learn and prosper to new heights of achievement. Every
moment is perfect in nature, whether you realize it or not. If you
recognize this age-old truth, you will accept every experience with
gratitude and you will see the opportunity in every event, no matter
how challenging it might appear initially. If you don’t understand this
principle, you will never realize the wonderful destiny that is yours for
the taking.
The mind has immeasurable and vast potential that remains
untapped in most people. It has been said that even the best
conditioned thinkers use only about 25% of their minds. What
happened to the remaining 75%? Indian yogis living high up in the
Himalayan mountains have disciplined their minds to the point where
they can control their so-called involuntary processes such as their
heartbeat, digestion and nervous functioning. These wise sages of the
East have been dipping their fingers into the vast pool of mental
potential for over 5000 years and have refined mastery of the mind
into a science. Through a combination of meditative techniques and
breath control these yogis are able to withstand enormous amounts of
physical pain and go for extended periods without food or sleep. Such
is the power within every one of us. Mothers whose children have
fallen under cars have, in the heat of the moment, lifted the vehicle to
save their little ones. Seventy-year-old men have run marathons and
4
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
climbed mountains. There are simply no limits for a person who
accepts no limits.
The human mind and spirit can perform miracles if properly used
and conditioned for excellence. And yet most human minds remain
uncultivated, unexplored and unchallenged. On an average day, the
average person thinks about 60,000 thoughts. Even more startling is
the fact that 95% of those thoughts are the same as the ones you
thought the day before. Limited thinking patterns must be exploded
and you must exert your tremendous mind strength to develop the
habit of Limitless Thinking. Throw off the shackles of your old
thinking patterns. All successful people have come to realize that your
thoughts form your world and you truly cannot afford the luxury of
even one negative thought. The first step to a life full of wonders is to
see that your outside world begins with your inside world and every
single thought must be one that will take you farther along the path of
a perfect life. Your thoughts can create magic and every thing you have
ever wanted. Today’s thoughts build tomorrow’s dreams.
Mahatma Ghandi, a frail, weak man roused hundreds of millions
of his countrymen and brought down an empire with passive
resistance. And yet he started out as a very average lawyer with a small
law practice in South Africa. It was the pain of injustice which sparked
his determination to improve his world and like all high achievers,
Ghandi started to work on himself first. He started building his mental
toughness and creating enormous discipline in his life. At an early
stage, he realized a cardinal rule for life mastery: success on the outside
begins within. Armed with the self-knowledge that his cause was just,
this little man in the white loincloth led his country to independence.
Arnold Schwarzenegger was a young man when he entered the
gym for the first time. He had skinny legs, a shrunken chest and small
shoulders and came from a background where financial resources were
always slim. But Schwarzenegger’s inner resources were always
abundant. Shortly after his first bodybuilding session he turned to
another bodybuilder and promised he would be Mr. Universe in five
years. The bodybuilder laughed, but look at Schwarzenegger now. Here
is a man who refuses to accept limitations on what he can do and the
success that he will meet as he bounds through the rose garden of life.
5
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
As Napoleon Hill wrote in his wonderful book, Think and Grow Rich :
“whatever the mind of man can conceive and believe he can achieve.”
So an immediate challenge for you is to weave your new habit of
Limitless Thinking today. The mind is like a muscle, if it is weak it can
be conditioned for strength. If you currently worry too much or live in
the past, this negative habit can be erased through the exercises you
will learn in the 30 day program at the end of this book. At this point,
simply remember that you alone are responsible for every thought you
think every second of every minute of every day and if you do not like
it, you have the power to change it. MegaThinking!, the powerful
habit of thinking without limitations as to what you can do, have, feel
and enjoy, arrives through gradual and steady conditioning of the
mind. Positive thinking is pure habit and is not easy at first if you have
allowed weeds to take over the garden of your mind. But the prosperity
mindset can be developed as any other habit. Habit is like building a
cable: each day the action is taken, the cable becomes stronger until
the point is reached where it is unbreakable. This is the point that you
must and will reach with this program. As Emerson wrote: “what lies
behind us and what lies in front of us pales in comparison to what lies
within us.”
Now sit down and identify on a piece of paper those thoughts
and thinking patterns that have held you back and limited your life in
the past. Awareness of your limitations is the first stage in banishing
them from your mind. Effective people are precisely aware of their
weaknesses as these are the weakest links in the chain and must be
eliminated. What beliefs have kept you from success, happiness, love
and self-mastery? What habitual thoughts are keeping you from the
peace of mind, rich relationships and ideal health that you deserve?
Note them and make a decision to eradicate them from your mind. It
will be hard at first and you will wish to give up but with a little
persistance they will be erased.
Once you note the limiting thoughts and consciously remove
them from your consciousness, it is key that you replace them with an
alternative that energizes you, motivates you and fills your dreams with
hope and passion. This age-old principle of the East operates from the
fact that at any one instant, your mind can only hold one thought. If
6
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life 7
the thought on the picture screen of your mind is a disempowering
one, quickly replace it with a positive one. With time, the negative
thoughts will be few and far between since a great law of nature is that
positive always dominates the negative.
Picture yourself in your mind’s eye as you hope to be, having all
you ever dreamed of having. Make a “Dream List” of everything you
desire in your lifetime. It might seem silly and wasteful to think such
positive and powerful thoughts in your current circumstances but there
is phenomenal power in believing in positive mental pictures.
THE PROMISE OF MegaLiving!
Infinite riches are all around you if you will open your mental eyes
and behold the treasure house of infinity within you. There is a gold
mine within you from which you can extract everything you need to
live life gloriously, joyously and abundantly.
Joseph Murphy, Ph.D.,
The Power of Your Subconscious Mind
The MegaLiving! 30 Day Program for Life Mastery is not a fad or
quick-fix course that will sustain your interest for a couple of weeks
and then take its place in the closet with all the other personal
development manuals you have bought in the past. It is a detailed
piece of research containing secret gems for life mastery prepared by
studying the success strategies of both the East and the West for over
a ten year period. You have dynamite in your hands whether you
realize it or not.
MegaLiving! is a complete program for the transformation of
your mind, body and character starting today. You have a golden
opportunity to be a true master of yourself and your existence. You can
make your world the bed of roses that you have always dreamed of, the
decision is yours alone. If you want this kind of a magical existence,
the golden key is to remember that your mind is the sole author of your
success. If you master your thoughts, you master your mind. Once you
master your mind, you master your life and when you master your life
you master your destiny.
Past experiences, failures or trouble spots have nothing to do
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
with the potential that exists within you. If anything, past failure has
made you far wiser and stronger than you would have been without the
benefit of the experience. Pain is a teacher. Today, and every day, take
complete charge and responsibility for your life and all that is in it. If
you don’t have enough money and want more, decide to make changes
and take determined action to realize your dreams. If you want better
health and more energy, make a decision from your very core to
achieve greater vitality. If you want ideal relationships, dedicate
yourself to becoming the kind of person that sustains such bonds. But
it will not just come to you by chance. If you keep doing the same things
every day, you are certain to get the same results every day. Winners are
no different from less successful people, they have just learned to do
different things that give them their fabulous results. In the chapters
which follow and in the 30 Day Program for Life Mastery at the end of
this book, you will learn precisely the things that the peak performers
do to create rich, fulfilling lives.
Let me ask you a few questions and please take the time to
answer them (doers are achievers):
Question Answer
Do you want to be a champion in life?
Do you want more mental power?
Do you want perfect health?
Do you want more energy and vitality?
Do you want to add fun to your life?
Do you want to fulfill your dreams?
Do you want more serenity in life?
Do you want more adventure in life?
Do you want a powerful character?
Do you want to live longer?
Do you seek self-mastery?
If you answered “YES!” to any one of these questions, this
program will be invaluable to you and your quest for a perfect life.
MegaLiving! blends the latest physical mastery and healthy lifestyle
techniques with ancient strategies of the East for mental conditioning
and character-building to offer a fully balanced owner’s manual for
8
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life 9
your mind, body and spirit. It is a holistic approach to personal growth
that, if applied daily and with sincere conviction, will ensure that you
will soar to heights higher than you ever dreamed possible. Thousands
of people have already used this program to profoundly (and quickly)
improve the quality of their lives and so can you. Ignite your desire and
stoke the fire in your belly for you will soon be MegaLiving!
Once you truly commit yourself to self-mastery and lifelong
success, you will appreciate how easy and fun it is. Small victories lead
to large victories. Once you start feeling more vital and energetic, you
will start achieving even more because you cannot do good unless you
feel good. This leads to another primary principle of successful living:
we are happiest when we are growing and feeling that we are contributing in
some way. The purpose of life is a life of purpose and we all, deep down,
want to leave a legacy of some form or another. When you dedicate
yourself to tapping into the extraordinary potential of your mind, body
and spirit, you set powerful forces into play and things start to happen
in every aspect of your life. And when you know that you are
improving, your confidence and enthusiasm starts to blossom. And
when your enthusiasm starts to blossom, your passion and energy
blooms. And when your energy starts to explode you start to create
opportunity after opportunity for success in your life. Perhaps the great
philosopher of India, Patanjali said it best: “When you are inspired by
some great purpose, some extraordinary project, all of your thoughts
break their bonds, your mind transcends limitations, your
consciousness expands in every direction and you find yourself in a
new great and wonderful world. Dormant forces, faculties and talents
become alive and you discover yourself to be a greater person by far
than you ever dreamed yourself to be.”
The chapters which follow and the MegaLiving! 30 Day Program
for Life Mastery will bring very dramatic results in each of the areas
that matter most in your life. You will view the world differently. No
longer will you feel that you never have enough time to do the things
you love to do. By applying the skills you will learn, you will shape your
circumstances and achieve the things that are important to you. No
longer will you feel like a leaf floating in the Fall wind, with no control
of your time and your life. By using the straightforward techniques
offered, you will attain a level of personal effectiveness that might
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
startle you. The essential point to understand as you continue to read
is that you are no different from any of the peak performers before you.
You have the “right stuff.” If others have achieved results which you
want, they are simply doing things a little differently. Perhaps they are
running their minds a little more effectively or managing their time
more meticulously. Perhaps they are using the power of the knowledge
around us more diligently or living a more disciplined, principled life.
Once you start to apply the tools for lifelong success which follow, you
will also see the results you have hoped for. You will understand the
importance of self-mastery and the tremendous opportunities that live
in every moment. You will appreciate that every day is a miracle and
life is a special path that we walk on. It can be a nirvana or a nightmare
- the choice is yours and yours alone. As British poet, William
Wordsworth wrote: “All which we behold is full of blessings.”
EXCELLING WITH THE PROGRAM
AND IGNITING YOUR LIFE
For the purposes of action nothing is more useful than narrowness
of thought combined with energy of will.
Henri Frederic Amiel
There are no shortcuts to the success and pleasure you will receive
when MegaLiving! becomes your habit. “Patience, the essential
quality of a man,” wrote Kwai-Koo-Tsu. To get the exceptional results
this program will deliver, the following points are important:
Follow the program daily: Reserve judgment on the success of the
techniques mentioned for 30 days. MegaLiving! blends the most
effective ideas for self-improvement from the West with little-known
philosophies of the East. Many of the mental and physical mastery
tools you will learn have been used by the sages of the Orient for over
5000 years. Some exercises designed to slow aging, tap your energy
reserves and build mental clarity come from an intense study of the
habits of the yogis living high in the Himalayan mountains of India.
These methods might seem novel at first until you experience their
remarkable benefits personally. Other techniques for personal
effectiveness on issues such as time management and relationship-
10
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life 11
building will seem more familiar to Western readers. Do not become
discouraged if you do not see results on the first day. Studies have
shown that it takes at least 21 days for perceptible changes to appear
in your life when you are trying to make improvements. Each day you
follow the program, you will feel better, perform better and achieve
more. By making small, daily changes on a gradual and consistent
basis, your enthusiasm will increase as will the visible results. Small
victories always lead to large victories.
A missed day following the principles which immediately follow
and the techniques in the 30 day program at the end of this book does
not mean you will remain where you are. Letting a day slip by without
doing something, no matter how small, to improve the quality of your
life will mean that you are falling backwards. Again, do not miss even
one day of this revolutionary program - daily study and application of
its principles is key to dramatic success and the conditioning of your
mind, body and character. Some days will be harder than others.
Discipline is built by following through on these “low energy” days.
Soon they will be few and far between. This is the nature of will.
Work hard on this life mastery program: This is your best chance to
reshape your world and become an elite performer on the playing field
of life. Use the SuccessLog provided at the end to chart your daily
progress, your thoughts, your aspirations and successes. Throughout
the day, review the principles and use the strategies provided. On the
subway, in the car and in the shower, mentally repeat your
commitment to enhancement of all areas of your life.
Publicize your commitment to MegaLiving!: Tell your family and
friends that you will follow through with the program and that they
will notice dramatic changes in you in the future. Inform them of your
goals. Make a public declaration of your commitment to being the very
best you can be. This is an excellent way to get leverage and
motivation on the dreams and desires you hold. No one wants to look
like a failure or like a person with no willpower and persistence. A
little pressure will stimulate you to positive action.
The key to success with the principles of MegaLiving! is to run
your own race. Do not compare yourself and your progress to others.
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
You are special and have your own gifts and virtues. As the ancient
Eastern proverb says: “There is nothing noble about being superior to
some other person. The true nobility lies in being superior to your
previous self.”
By implementing the ideas you will learn daily and making small,
consistent changes, your personal energy and desire will snowball and
soon take on enormous dimensions. By charting the progress in the
SuccessLog at the very end of this book, your interest and enthusiasm
will increase. And by publicizing your commitment to the course, you
will get tremendous leverage for your ultimate aspiration: a perfect life
and total self-mastery.
12
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
YOUR COMMITMENT TO SELF-MASTERY : KAIZEN
Kaizen means constant and never ending improvement in Japanese.
There is no pursuit more noble nor important than the pursuit of selfimprovement.
As Confucius said many years ago: “good people
strengthen themselves ceaselessly.” Consistent and constant
improvement in all areas is essential to reaching your true potential.
The personal trademark of almost every high achiever and successful
person is a dedication to daily improvement in both their personal and
professional lives. From Ben Franklin to Mahatma Ghandi, from
Martin Luther King Jr. to Ivan Lendl and from Nelson Mandela to
Mother Teresa, effective people do things daily to advance confidently
in the direction of their goals and dreams.
You must also apply the Kaizen principle on a daily basis to
condition your mind to peak performance. It has been said that the
mind is a terrible master but a wonderful servant. By seeking to
improve your mind and condition it to excellence of thought, this
wonderful servant will most certainly bring you all the peace,
prosperity and joy you now search for.
Study any great success story and you will undoubtedly learn of
13
Man is made or unmade by himself. In the armoury of thought he
forges the weapons by which he destroys himself. He also fashions the
tools with which he builds for himself heavenly mansions of joy,
strength and peace. By the right choice, and true application of
thought, man ascends to divine perfection. By the abuse and wrong
application of thought, he descends below the level of the beast.
James Allen, As a Man Thinketh
CHAPTER TWO
Your Mind & its Unlimited Potential
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
their commitment to Kaizen. They will be dedicated to small, daily
improvements in the key areas of their lives and becoming the very
best that they could be. Personal mastery is like a bank account, call it
the Personal Excellence Account. By improving daily, whether it is by
spending some time exercising, reading, visualizing or forging better
relationships, you are making regular deposits into your account. After
only one month, for example, you will have improved the richness and
quality of your world by at least 30%. And after a single year, your life
will have improved by more than 365% (factoring in the power of
compound interest). But when you sleep too much, worry too much,
watch television too much or eat too much, you make withdrawals in
your Personal Excellence Account.
Walt Stack, an 80 year-old man who runs the entire length of the
Golden Gate Bridge in California every day, come rain or shine, was
asked how he kept his teeth from chattering on those cold mornings.
“I leave them in my locker,” he replied wryly. To be great you must act
great. Nothing can stop a person who refuses to be stopped. Yet most
people spend their entire lives struggling for a little happiness against
a current of problems or difficulties, hoping to see a small glimpse of
blue sky against the mass of dark clouds which seem to blanket their
lives. These people never realize the magic secret of true happiness:
one must rise above the clouds to see the blue sky rather than
constantly trying to push them aside.
Clouds will always be there but anyone who conditions their
mind and body to the correct degree will rise above any cloud to live
with lasting bliss in the blue sky of life. Dedicate yourself to such selfenhancement
each and every day of your life. Become a champion.
Remember, happiness is a method of travelling through this wonderful
world and not a destination, a place you arrive at in the future. A time
will definitely come when your personal power takes you to a place
where you have real freedom and joy. This is a place where all dreams
come true. This is the place of self-mastery. This is a place called
MegaLiving!
Excellence in Personal Mastery
Does your mind sometimes feel like a bowl of pudding? Are you
easily distracted or pulled away from important tasks that require
14
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
powerful thought and concentration? Do you lack will-power and
discipline and get into the same limiting, destructive thought patterns
over and over? If so, you must exert your personal influence (which
may currently be dormant inside of you) to exercise and condition
your mind. As you learned earlier, the mind is similar to the muscles of
the body: if you do not use it and give it a good workout every day, it
will become flabby. A flabby mind allows weak thoughts to enter.
Weak thoughts drain your energy and limit your actions. Limited,
unproductive actions prevent you from being the best and attaining all
of your desires.
Sir Issac Newton, the father of classical physics had an
exceptional ability to concentrate on a particular problem from
morning until it was solved late in the evening. This mental giant said
that “if I have done the public any service, it is due to patient
thought.” What most people do not realize is that anyone can enhance
the level of their mental functioning. You can become more mentally
agile, improve your memory well beyond its current level and become
a smarter mental athlete. You can train yourself to go weeks without
even one negative thought (William James said: “the essence of genius
is knowing what to overlook.”). But you must go into training like any
serious athlete. You must place your mind on a regime designed to fire
up the brain and dramatically reshape it. The MegaLiving! program
will do this for you if you follow it strictly and passionately. While the
mental aerobics listed in the 30 day MegaLiving! program and the
brain-building exercises appearing in the course take you to new
intellectual heights, the important idea to hammer home at this point
is that you must set aside one hour each day, at the very least, to renew
and revitalize your mind, body and spirit. There are 168 hours in a
week, can you not find an hour a day to take care of the very tools that
will bring you the success that you desire so much? You may say that
you are very busy and cannot afford to take this time off. In reality, you
cannot afford to miss this essential period to sharpen your mind,
condition your body and feed your spirit. As the German poet Johann
von Goethe said: “Things which matter most should never be at the
mercy of things which matter least.”
What should you do in this one hour “rekindling” session that is
so very important? The answer is clear: practice self-mastery, Kaizen.
15
16 MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
Although the program lists particulars, what is key is that you spend
some time on each of the following, each day (rise an hour earlier or
do it in the evening, it will be one of the most magical decisions you
make):
1. Personal Development
Personal development is really any activity that gives you
knowledge on improving your life and all its elements. Personal
development includes self-renewal and stress reduction. Your daily
time for personal development could involve reading an inspirational
book like The Power of Positive Thinking or Think and Grow Rich. It may
involve the exceptionally valuable habit of listening to motivational
tapes while you drive to work or sit on the bus. Or it could be digesting
a hot book on diet and health or simply watching the sun rise. The key
is that you start to tap the incredible amount of information that is out
there on improving your life.
It is amazing to learn of the strategies and techniques available
which would do wonders for most peoples’ lives if they only knew
about them. All we need is a single powerful idea to change our lives
for the better. What distinguishes successes from failures is that the
successes constantly thirst for new ideas and knowledge. Successful
people are hungry for anything that will give them an edge in life’s
wonderful game. The answers to a life of perfection and bliss are out
there and as abundant as the air we breathe. Be open to them and be
on the lookout for them at all times.
Readers are leaders and you will be a true leader once you get into
the habit being devoted to personal development on a daily basis. Miss
a meal but don’t miss your daily personal improvement time.
2. Physical Fitness
You should spend at least 30 minutes daily cultivating the perfect
health which lies deep inside the temple of your body. Daily exercise,
as you have heard so many times, is one of the most effective ways to
arrive at the state of personal excellence. If someone said he would
give you the secret of longevity, super energy and serenity, you would
do almost anything to get it. Well the secret is yours now: exercise
every day and you will see a vitality enter your life that will surely
change it very dramatically.
A little exercise every day will keep you more relaxed, improve
your concentration, your productivity, your creativity and dramatically
improve your inner world. With the abundance of energy a fitness
program surely provides, you will be able to take those positive steps in
the direction of your dreams. Swim, run, walk, take up karate, learn
how to water ski, play squash, bicycle, garden, get some fresh air,
rollerblade, have fun at aerobics but get out of that life-sapping habit
of sitting on a couch and watching TV all night!
How will you feel when your friends say you look marvelous and
years younger? How will you feel when you have the stamina to work
all day, come home to laugh and play with your family and later, after
a brisk walk around your neighborhood, slip off to your den to spend a
couple of hours on an activity that will really make your life great.
Trust me, physical excellence precedes mental excellence.
3. Relaxation and Personal Renewal Time
The body and mind are like a high performance racing car. It will
perform at its peak if it remains cool and well-oiled. Relaxation is
essential for the body and without it, the body slowly deteriorates and
loses its vitality. “The soul that moves in the world of the senses and
yet keeps the senses in harmony... finds rest in quietness,” notes the
ancient Indian text The Bhagavad Gita. The body and mind are
intimately linked and if your body is tense, your mind will be tense,
unfocused and agitated. Stress hampers your creativity and intellect in
very serious ways. When you are under stress, you are prevented from
being your best and tapping your real potential.
A while back I was in a grocery store and saw a mother pushing
a screaming baby. I overheard the mother saying “Don’t yell Jennifer,
don’t scream Jennifer, be calm Jennifer.” As I passed by the mother I
said, “excuse me Madam, I can’t tell you how impressed I am with the
way you spoke to your baby.” She looked at me and then smiled, “I am
Jennifer.”
We all have our own strategies for stress control. The key is that
you have one that works well and use it on a daily basis - even if only
for ten minutes. It is essential to spend time every single day on
relaxation and quieting your mind. It will be the best decision you ever
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life 17
18 MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
made and will lead to more effectiveness in all the important areas of
your life. Saying you don’t have time for a daily period to relax,
meditate and unwind is like saying you do not have time to stop for gas
because you are too busy driving - eventually it will catch up with you.
Every peak performer, from Michael Jordan and Wayne Gretzky
to the President of the United States recognizes the value of a calm,
disciplined and relaxed mind. In the East, a daily period of silence is as
common as eating - everyone does it from a very young age. So should
you. Exceptional serenity, mental clarity and will-power can be
achieved through a daily period of relaxation and renewal. Ancient
deep breathing techniques from India and China, the disciplines of
stretching and yoga, meditation, contact with nature, self-massage and
mental tranquility exercises are all part of the MegaLiving! 30 day
program which you will explore later. For now, appreciate the 17th
century philosopher Robert Burton’s sage advice: “a quiet mind cureth
all.” Relax your mind and body daily, jump start your life and soar to
your highest potential.
THE NATURE OF THE MIND :
THE ULTIMATE SUPERPOWER
Thought is a vital, living force, the most vital, subtle and irresistible
force that exists in the universe. ... Thoughts are living things.
Swami Sivananda
To unleash the tremendous power reserves which currently sleep
within you, it is critical that you first become aware of the nature of
the mind. In life, you are given an owner’s manual for everything but
that which is most important to you - the ten pound mass which rests
between your shoulders. In school, we are taught how to do complex
Algebra and the capitals of far away lands that we may never visit.
What about the nature of our greatest gift, our mind? The first step to
personal mastery and successful living is to learn how to run your mind
like a winner. The second step is to understand once and for all that
your mind can create magic in your life if you only let it. The only
limitations in your life are those that you consciously set. When you
think without limits and dream great dreams, wonderful things happen
and powerful forces are set into play.
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life 19
To run your mind like a peak performer, study the following 10 Golden
Rules for Mental Mastery:
1. The level of your success is determined by what you think
every second of every minute of every day. Your thoughts shape
your world - mental mastery is the DNA of life mastery. Today’s
thoughts will serve to build your dreams of tomorrow.
2. Your outer world reflects your inner world. If you want to change
your life, you must start by changing the thoughts you put into
your mind. Success on the outside begins with success on the
inside.
3. You alone are responsible for what you think. Most importantly,
you can change the way you think and remove any negative
thinking habits by the daily practice of mental discipline and
conditioning. Thinking patterns are habits and, like all habits,
they can be changed when you strongly desire to change them
and take concrete action towards your goal.
4. A supersuccessful mindset does not happen in a day. You have to
work hard on it just like any other worthy pursuit in life. But with
30 days of daily, concentrated practice, you will note astonishing
changes in the way you think, feel and act.
5. One of the great keys to a better life is to change your self-image.
Our self-image is determined by the mental pictures we
constantly run through our minds. Our minds work through
pictures and when we change the pictures to show what we really
want in our lives and what we really can achieve, our self-image
will also improve dramatically. This leads to greater confidence
and belief in our personal abilities and power. Goals are then
easily achieved and the ordinary becomes the extraordinary.
6. Anything you faithfully and honestly believe you can achieve,
you will achieve if you take persistent action in that direction.
Constantly keep your dreams at the front of your mind. Repeat
them all day, every day. Never, let go of them. When you
concentrate all your mental and physical energy on a single
purpose, dormant forces that you never knew you had are
sparked into action. This is the secret of genius: finding what you
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
love to do and then spending all your time doing it. As one wise
person has said: “once you find what you truly love doing, you
will never have to work another day in your life.” People with far
less than you have achieved great feats.
7. The Law of Attraction is the dominant law of the mind. What
you think about and believe is what you attract into your life.
People who are happy and motivated attract such people into
their world. People with a positive expectation of super success
will attract opportunities to allow them to arrive at this
destination.