and pleasant leisure activities will be the panacea for all ills. These
pursuits must be combined with positive thinking and peace of mind
for true happiness and longevity.
106. Get into the habit of taking mental vacations throughout the
day. Visit Bermuda for five minutes in the morning. Visualize a swim
in the Mediterranean in the afternoon and skiing down the slopes of
the Alps just before you head for home at the end of your busy and
productive day. Try this for two months and schedule these rest periods
into your agenda just as you would your essential meetings or tasks.
The rewards will be significant.
107. A change is as good as a rest. Whether this change is as major as
a change of employment or as minor as a leisure pursuit which
occupies your entire attention for an hour three times a week, these
changes in routine, and mindset are entirely beneficial. In selecting
the activity, try to find something totally engaging which requires deep
concentration so that your mind is free from the mundane but
seemingly important aspects of your day. Many executives are
becoming involved in the martial arts for just this reason. If your mind
wanders for even a split second, a harsh lesson is soon learned. Pain is
a great motivator and always will be.
108. Study these 10 fundamentals of happiness:
• Pursue a productive, exciting and active life
• Engage in meaningful activities every minute of every day
• Develop an organized, planned lifestyle with little chaos
• Set realistic goals yet keep your mark high
• Think positively - you cannot afford the luxury of a negative
thought
• Avoid needless worry over trifling matters
• Devote time to fun
• Develop a warm, outgoing personality with a sincere love of
people
• Get in the habit of giving more than receiving
• Learn to live in the present. The past is water under the bridge
of life.
109. Strive to be humble and live a simple life.
111
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
110. Read “A History of Knowledge” by Charles Van Doren which
chronicles the history of the world’s ideas. In this one book is an
absolute wealth of knowledge. Get it, read it and enjoy it.
111. Read “The Art of the Leader” by William A. Cohen. It is both
inspirational and practical.
112. Develop that elusive quality known as charisma. The following
are ten qualities of a charismatic leader:
1. Be committed to what you are doing
2. Look like a winner and act like one
3. Have big dreams, a vision and reach for the sky
4. Steadily advance in the direction of your goals
5. Prepare and work hard at every task you do
6. Build a mystique around yourself
7. Be interested in others and show kindness
8. Have a strong sense of humour
9. Be known for the strength of your character
10. Have grace under pressure. (John F. Kennedy said that “the
elusive half-step between middle management and true
leadership is grace under pressure.”)
113. In work, love and life, play hard and play fair.
114. Do not talk when you are listening. Interrupting is one of the
most common discourtesies. Listen aggressively with the full scope of
your attention. You will be amazed at what you learn and how your
counsel will soon be sought by many.
115. “Anybody can become angry - that is easy; but to be angry with
the right person, and to the right degree, and at the right time, and for
the right purpose, and in the right way - that is not within everybody’s
power and is not easy.” - Aristotle
116. Knowledge is power. People who have achieved great success are
not necessarily more skillful or intelligent than others. What separates
them is their burning desire and thirst for knowledge. The more one
knows, the more one achieves. Great leaders have techniques to allow
them to arrive at the top of the mountain. Read the biographies of the
world’s leaders and learn from their habits, inspirations and
philosophies. Cultivate the important practice of active role
modelling.
112
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
117. All the answers to any questions are in print. How to improve as
a public speaker, how to improve your relations with others, how to
become fitter or develop a better memory - all aspects of personal
development are dealt with in books. Therefore, in order to achieve
your maximum potential, you must read daily. But, in this age of
information, you must be ruthless in what you consume. Focus on your
goals and read only those materials that will be an asset to you. Do not
attempt to read everything for you are busy and have other tasks at
hand. Choose what is important and filter out what is of no value.
Begin with a solid newspaper every morning for an excellent summary
of the key events of the day. Also ensure that your readings are broadly
based. For example, perhaps you may wish to read history, business,
Eastern philosophy, health books etc. Then go to the library and
develop the habit of making regular visits. Read the classics from
Hemingway to Bram Stoker. Read history, with all its lessons on life
and read biology for a new perspective. Look under the heading of
“success” at the library and you will be amazed at the literature you will
find: inspirational stories of people who developed greatness in the
face of adversity, strategies for improving yourself physically, mentally
and spiritually and texts to tap the unlimited power for success that
certainly exists within us. Drink deeply from such books. Surround
yourself with them and read them constantly whether on the bus each
day or before you go to bed. Let them inspire and motivate you.
118. Get into the habit of breakfast meetings. An early meal to touch
base with a friend or business associate is a most pleasant way to start
the day and allows you to maintain your contacts in the face of a busy
schedule.
119. If you live in a flat, always ensure that it is very bright and has a
swimming pool. A pool is especially important because it will allow
you to exercise no matter how busy your schedule. There is nothing
like a refreshing swim after a long, productive day. You will feel
excellent and sleep like a baby.
120. “Excellence is an art won by training and habituation. We do not
act rightly because we have virtue or excellence, but rather we have
those because we have acted rightly. We are what we repeatedly do.
Excellence, then, is not an act but a habit.” - Aristotle
113
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
121. “Today is yesterday’s pupil.” - Benjamin Franklin
122. If you have a choice of taking two paths, always take the more
daring of the two. Calculated risk taking often produces extraordinary
results.
123. Every day, get away from the noise, the crowds and the rush and
spend a few hours alone in peaceful introspection, deep reading or
simple relaxation.
124. That which any person who has walked this Earth has achieved
you can achieve with the right mental attitude, perseverance and
industry. Limiting thoughts and weak mental images must be banished.
One’s focus must be on the attainment of goals that are truly
important.
125. Get into the habit of memorizing beautiful poetry. Not only will
it be a great source of entertainment but it will quickly lift your
intellectual functions to a higher level by improving your memory,
concentration and mental agility.
126. Keep your words soft and arguments hard.
127. Break the worry habit by putting things in perspective and
laughing over small setbacks. Repeat to yourself that “this will soon
pass”. Then take a sheet of paper, write out the worry on your mind.
Allot a certain period of time to think on it, isolate the precise
problem and formulate a powerful line of attack. By this practical
technique, your negative, energy sapping habit will soon be a faint
memory of the past.
128. Be known as that person who goes the extra mile. The person
who works longer than others. The one who takes on the extra
assignments and follows them through with great success. Be the
person who always has concerns about others and who makes family
members feel truly special. Be a standout, the one with a balance in
both personal and professional excellence. Be a star that shines
brightly for all others to admire.
129. Become a committed and sincere networker. Cultivate new
friendships. You will truly be surprised where people end up over the
years and how small, kind gestures will help you later on in life. Treat
114
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
everyone who crosses your path as if they are the most important
person in your world. You will certainly meet with great success.
130. When you look for something you will find it. If you constantly
expect exceptional success, you will surely have it. Peak performers
attract success. You must keep the goals you desire to achieve at the
forefront of your mind throughout the day. Repeat your ambitions at
least five times a day and visualize yourself achieving them. If your goal
is to be rich, picture the house you will be living in, the car you will be
driving, what it will feel like to be rich and the pleasure of attaining
your goals in life. Repeat your ambition over and over until you have
complete certainty that you will attain your desires and eventually you
will.
131. Develop a sense of wonder about the world. Be an explorer. Find
pleasure in the things that others take for granted. Stop and actually
listen to that wonderful street musician playing the trumpet. Read that
classic book your father loved so much. Plan to get away from the city
next week and visit a secluded, powerfully natural place for a few days.
Take a mini-retreat and care for your mind, body and spirit. It will
profoundly improve the quality of your life.
132. Send cards on birthdays and little notes from time to time
showing that you care and were thinking about your relations. We are
all busy but if you spend just five minutes a week to send a card to a
friend or family member, by the year end you will have sent out 52
cards. This is a small investment for the dividends that are guaranteed
to follow.
133. Remember and use people’s names when you talk to them. A
person’s name is a uniquely sweet sound to them.
134. Go outdoors and look up into the blue sky for half an hour. Note
the supremely strong feeling that you get when you are connected to
Nature. Get away from your rigid schedule today and spend the
afternoon in a beautiful setting. Walk in the woods and sit by a cool
stream. Go fishing or rent a canoe. Getting away from your routine will
provide a refreshing release and make you feel wonderful when you
eventually return.
135. Once every few weeks, leave your watch at home. In this society
we often become bound to the clock and soon it governs our every
115
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
action like a rigid taskmaster. Go through the day doing precisely what
you wish to do and for however long you wish to do it. Spend time
with that special person without having to run off to your next
appointment. Savour the moments and focus on what is truly
important rather than those mundane things that somehow take on a
greater importance than they really deserve. Lose the clock and gain
some quality time.
136. Laugh at work and be known as a positive achiever.
137. An idea gives rise to a mental image. A mental image will then
generate a mental habit out of which a mental trait ultimately
blossoms. Master your thoughts and you master your mind; master your
mind and you master your life; master your life and you master your
destiny.
138. Recognize the tremendous power of opposition thinking. This
simple technique simply involves the substitution of a positive thought
each and every time a negative or limiting thought enters your mind
and begins to detract from your focus. For example, on a Sunday
evening, you may think “I wish I did not have to return to work
tomorrow after such a pleasant and relaxing weekend.” Immediately
replace this defeating thought pattern before it begins to take hold by
thinking the opposite. For example you might think “I cannot wait to
return to the office given the exciting projects on the go and the
wonderful sense of accomplishment I receive after a productive,
challenging week.” Then think how fortunate you are to have a job
and one that you can advance in through your own efforts and
productivity. Make a list of all of the positive attributes of your position
and repeat them over and over. Soon the negative pattern will be
broken and you will look toward the exciting week ahead with that
most fabulous of qualities: enthusiasm.
139. Get deep into the habit of personal introspection. Ben Franklin
called this one of the most important strategies for personal
effectiveness. Spend ten minutes every night before you go to bed in
self-examination. Think about the good things you did during the day
and the bad actions you may have taken which you must change in
order to excel and grow. Successful people are simply more thoughtful
than others. Daily reflection will soon allow for the eradication of your
116
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
negative qualities (ranging from procrastination to gossiping to
insulting others) and will sharpen the mind. After steady practice, a
time will eventually arrive when the mistakes you make are few indeed
and your personal power will move to the highest level.
140. The most efficient and effective alarm clock ever developed lies
within our own minds. If you do not believe this, try the following:
1. Sit in an easy chair approximately ten minutes before you go
to bed.
2. Shut your eyes and gently rest your hands on your knees.
3. Breathe deeply for a few minutes (inhale to the count of
five, hold to the count of ten and exhale fully).
4. Repeat the following command to yourself at least twenty
times: “I will awake at (the desired time) feeling fresh, alert
and enthusiastic.” This command must be said with feeling
and emotion. Then take a few seconds to visualize yourself
waking up at the desired time (the more detailed the mental
picture the better) and imagine how great you will feel. You
will soon wake up at the desired moment after little or no
practice.
141. Some men see things as they are and say “why?” I dream of things
that never were and say “why not?” George Bernard Shaw
142. Use these strategies to improve the quality of your mind-calming
meditation:
1. Practice meditation at the same time each day and in the
same place so that your mind becomes accustomed to entering
the desired serene state as soon as you enter the peaceful place.
2. The early morning is undoubtedly the most powerful time to
meditate. Indian yogis believe that the pre-dawn time has
almost magical qualities which aid in achieving the superpeaceful
state so many meditators attempt to attain.
3. Before you start, command your mind to be quiet by using
affirmations such as “I will be focused and very calm now.”
4. If thoughts do enter, do not force them out but simply let
them pass like clouds making way for the beautiful blue sky.
Picture that your mind is like a still lake without even a ripple.
117
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
5. Sit for ten minutes at first and then increase the time every
few sittings. After a month or two, you will not be interrupted
by any pressing thoughts and will surely feel a sense of peace
that you have never felt before.
143. Forge and foster great friendships as such relationships are
essential for maintaining a healthy and successful life. Find a few
minutes every day to jot down some warm wishes to an old friend or to
place a telephone call to someone you have not had a chance to speak
to for a while. Show compassion and sincere consideration for all your
friends and watch the results which follow. Develop long lasting
friendships by being a good friend. Also, make it a priority to seek out
new friends no matter how many you may be fortunate enough to
have. This is one of life’s greatest joys which many of us miss.
144. Purchase a cassette or CD of Miles Davis’s Kind Of Blue. It is a
uniquely soothing compilation that will refresh and soothe you after a
challenging and productive day. Music such as this is good for the soul.
145. Drown your appetite by drinking more water - ten glasses a day
is ideal. It revitalizes the system and purifies the body. Also, get into
the habit of eating soups and more complex carbohydrates such as rice,
potatoes and pasta which feed your hunger with far less calories than
other less healthy foods. You truly are what you eat and must ensure
that your diet is designed to maximize your energy and mental clarity.
146. Develop the essential habit of punctuality for it is most
important for high success. Punctuality reflects discipline and a proper
regard for others. Without it, even the most sophisticated person
appears slightly offensive. Do not be early and certainly never be late.
Budget your time and, should you arrive early, take a walk or simply
relax for a few moments to ensure that you arrive on time as requested.
You will be appreciated and welcomed always if you cultivate this
important quality that appears so rarely these days.
147. The telephone is there for your convenience, not for the
convenience of others who are attempting to contact you. If you are
busy with a task, do not answer the phone or have someone answer the
call so that you may return it at a more suitable time. Do not let such
interruptions waste your time. Most phone calls are not important and
118
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
last far too long anyway. Over the course of the average American’s
lifetime, she will spend two years unsuccessfully returning phone calls.
There are so many important and fun things to do in life. The
challenge is to respect precious time so that we can achieve a fuller,
more satisfying life.
148. Start your day off well. Before you get out of bed each morning,
say a prayer or repeat your personal affirmation giving thanks for the
day and all the positive things you will see and achieve. Make a
conscious decision to make this the best day of your life and meet with
pleasure, success and fun. If you believe it, it will most certainly
happen. A timeless secret for lifelong success is to live each day as if it
were your last.
149. Confide in your partner. This will strengthen the relationship
and allow you both to grow at the same pace. It is also a wonderful
tonic to share important or otherwise troubling things with the person
you are closest to.
150. Push yourself just a little harder and a little farther each day.
Winners on the playing field of life push the envelope of their
potential daily. Do the thing you fear and the death of fear is certain.
Winners do the things that less developed people don’t like doing even
though they also might not enjoy doing them. This is what strength of
character and courage is all about. Tackle your weaknesses. Do the
thing that you have consistently put off. Write that thank you note or
letter that you have neglected for so long. Exercise your discipline
muscles and they will rise to the occasion by filling your day with more
satisfaction, more effectiveness and far more energy.
151. All individuals who have attained the highest of levels generally
have cultivated the essential mental habit of optimism. Without
optimism, life loses its lustre and hardships appear at every step of the
way. This is an essential life habit.
152. Today, write down the seven best qualities of individuals who you
admire and post this list by your bed. Then, each morning as you rise,
focus on a new quality which you will strive to implement during the
day. After one week, you will notice small differences in yourself.
119
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
In one month, these traits will become firmly embedded. After two
months, all those important qualities will be yours.
153. You have as many reputations as you do acquaintances as each
person you know thinks differently of you. What should truly concern
you is your character. You have full control of this and this is what you
must develop, refine and cultivate. Once your character is strong and
vigorous, then all else that is positive will follow.
154. Consider yourself as an orange. Only what is really inside can
come out. If you fill your mind with thoughts of serenity, positivity,
strength, courage and compassion, when someone squeezes you, this is
the only juice that can flow.
155. Our lives have been described as a parenthesis in eternity. We are
but a small blip on the stage of the Universe. As we can take nothing
with us when we leave, then the real meaning of our existence must
be to give and serve others. Keep this in mind. When you wake up
early in the morning, repeat the mantra: “I will serve others today, I
will care for others today and I will be kind today.” This kind of living
will bring you huge returns if you stay on the purpose of aiding others
rather than on the outcome of personal gain.
156. Be known as an innovator at your place of work. Sit down over
the next week and write out ten suggestions for your supervisor as to
how to improve the work being done and the quality of the workplace
itself. Be known as an idea person willing to discover challenges and
tackle them with zest and enthusiasm.
157. Learn to laugh at yourself.
158. Keep open the windows of your mind.
159. Try to go through one full day without saying “I”. Focus on
others. Listen to others and you will learn wonderful new things as well
as gain friendships.
160. Spend one hour a day in full silence except in answer to direct
questions. Even then, answer directly and without extending the
conversation unduly. We, so very often, talk around subjects and
repeat ourselves. This ancient Eastern exercise will not only build your
will-power but develop clarity and precision of language which is
essential for effective communication.
120
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
161. Each day, do two things that you do not like doing. This may be
the preparation of a report you have been putting off or shining your
shoes. It does not matter how small the task, just do it! Soon these
chores will not seem so bad, your personal power will increase and your
productivity will soar. Try it because this is an age-old technique for
building strength of character.
162. True happiness comes from only one thing: achievement of goals,
whether they are personal, professional or otherwise. You are happiest
when you feel you are growing. When you feel that you are
contributing and advancing in the direction of your dreams, you will
notice that you have boundless energy and vitality. Time spent on
activities which offer little reward aside from a fleeting feeling of
relaxation (television watching is the best example), is time lost
forever. Relaxation is essential but chose the most effective means of
renewal and spend your time in productive pursuits that will slowly
move you along the path of accomplishment. Happiness comes from
doing - not sleeping.
163. Napoleon III of France had a special ability to remember the
names of all those he met. His secret was to say “so sorry, I missed your
name” after being introduced to a new person. This would cause the
name to be repeated and reinforced within his memory. If the name
was difficult, he would ask for the proper spelling.
164. The sages of China have held a basic life philosophy for
thousands of years: develop an indomitable spirit along with courtesy
and integrity. The repetition of these three traits will make you an
exceptionally powerful individual respected by all. Exert your effort
and personal influence to attain these qualities.
165. A valuable technique for defeating negative and self-limiting
thoughts that can hamper you from attaining peak performance is the
mental interrupt device. When a negative thought enters your
consciousness, first you must become aware of it and have a strong
desire to remove it for good. To do this, interrupt the negative train of
thought by doing something to break and banish the self-limiting
pattern. When the bad thought enters, you may pinch yourself and say,
“I am strong and weak thoughts are gone”, or you may shout out loud
or do anything that will divert your attention and remove the negative
121
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
focus. By practising this technique, you will see a marked decrease in
the negative thoughts that most people have, paving the way to the
mindset of a true winner.
166. Taking time from your busy work and family schedule to focus on
personal growth activities is essential and is never to be considered a
waste. Taking one hour from your hectic morning to watch kids
playing in a nearby park or to take a brisk walk might seem like a poor
use of time to some. But by making more time for life’s simple pleasures
and bringing more balance into your day, you will make the remaining
hours far more productive and effective. You cannot do good unless
you feel good. When you are serene, relaxed and enthusiastic you are
also more productive, creative and dynamic. This is something that
has been proved time and time again and yet we consistently get
caught up in the apparent immediacy of our routine and fail to see the
forest for the trees.
167. Read more, learn more, laugh more and love more.
168. Pick five relationships that you desire to improve over the next
six months. Write out the names of these people and under each name
detail why you want to improve the relationship, how you plan to do
so and in what time frame. This is simply another facet of goal setting
- the practice which will always yield excellent results in any of life’s
fields. Be committed to being a better parent, friend and citizen. Be
creative in the steps you take to show your appreciation and respect for
your loved ones. Sending notes is fine but consider unique and
thoughtful measures ranging from a romantic picnic in the country
with your partner to an early morning fishing trip with an old friend.
169. Remember the power of prayer.
170. An excellent investment in your personal growth is the six tape
series of Reverend Norman Vincent Peale entitled “The Power of
Positive Thinking”. Get it and listen to it over and over. It is packed
full of strategies and techniques that, without fail, will ensure that you
live a long, happy, productive and prosperous life.
171. Consider purchasing a pocket organizer which may prove to be
an excellent tool for scheduling, recording your commitments and
keeping the responsibilities of your life in fine order. One can be
purchased at a reasonable price.
122
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
172. Browse second-hand bookstores every few months searching for
lost treasures of character-building books. You will find gems on public
speaking, improving your habits, time management, personal health
and other important subjects for low prices. Some of these older texts
are the very best and come from an age where every young person was
under an obligation to develop discipline and good life habits regularly.
173. Read The Magic of Believing by Claude M. Bristol. It will allow
you to release the powerful forces which most certainly exist in your
mind but may presently be untapped.
174. Be known as someone with a cool head, warm heart and great
character. Your presence on this earth will long be remembered.
175. It has been said that doing something for others is the highest
form of religion. Every week, out of the 168 hours available, spend a
few in service to others. Many say that such selfless service soon
becomes a key focus within their lives. Give your time at a seniors
home or to needy children. Teach someone how to read or offer to give
a public lecture on the subject of your expertise. Simply take action
and do something to leave a legacy.
176. Fill your home with bright, fresh flowers. This is one of the best
investments you can make. Let the sounds of great music, loud
laughter and good fun fill the oasis of your home.
177. Get to know and enjoy your neighbors. They make life more
pleasant and can provide helpful resources when you least expect it.
178. Recognize the power of mantras and the repetition of positive,
powerful words. Indian yogis have employed this technique for over
4000 years to live tranquil, productive and focused lives. Create your
own personal mantra which you can repeat daily to enhance your
character and strengthen your spirit.
179. When the breath is still and strong, so is the mind.
180. Use the following visualization from time to time. Sit in a quiet
place and picture that you will be on the earth for only another day.
Who would you call, what would you say and what would you do?
These questions will give you some important insights into what
outstanding actions you must endeavor to complete.
123
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
181. Study the following evidence of high character:
1. Precision & clarity of thought and speech
2. Refined and gentle manners
3. The power and habit of introspection
4. The power of personal growth
5. The power to achieve your goals & dreams
182. “Youth is not a time of life; it is a state of mind. People grow old only
by deserting their ideals and by outgrowing the consciousness of youth. Years
wrinkle the skin, but to give up enthusiasm wrinkles the soul... You are as
old as your doubt, your fear, your despair. The way to keep young is to keep
your faith young. Keep your self-confidence young. Keep your hope young.”
- Dr. L.F. Phelan
183. Explore the healing powers of Chinese herbal medicine and
similar Eastern strategies for maintaining a state of perfect health
(consult an expert at all times and take a formal course on the subject
to gain powerful insights into this most useful area of healing).
184. Be certain to organize your time around the true priorities of your
life. As Stephen Covey has noted: “it is easy to say no when there is a
deeper yes burning within.”
185. Slow down your pace of life. In this complex age, we are running
our lives at a frantic pace. Focus on what is truly important and start
undertaking activities that will slow you down and rekindle the
natural, calm within us. Sit in the grass and watch the blue sky for half
an hour - at first, it is not as easy as one would think and the urge is to
get up after only a few minutes of such useful relaxation. Once you are
used to a healthier pace of living, with regular periods dedicated to the
simple pleasures of life, every other activity will become more efficient
and enjoyable.
186. Try eating only fruit and milk for a full day. Fasting is a powerful
success strategy of the East that millions use regularly to maintain peak
health and mental clarity. By trying this simple practice every few
weeks you will notice a surge in your energy level and a lightness in
your walk. Big meals require a significant amount of energy that could
be better directed toward more productive pursuits.
124
MegaLiving! 30 Days to a Perfect Life
187. Value your spouse’s laugh and keep your partner’s picture close by
your work desk for inspiration and pleasant thoughts throughout the
day.
188. If you are married, have your partner’s initials and your own
engraved on the inside of your wedding bands along with the date of
your marriage. This is useful not only in case the rings are lost but to
provide you both with personalized keepsakes that may be passed
down to successive generations.