that if one is in a Spanish-speaking
country, it is also advisable not to
compliment a strong woman by
calling her macha.
w
At a loss for words, hockey puck?
Quote Shakespeare.
BULLETIN: The unparalleled king of insults
is not Don Rickles.
As has certainly not passed one’s notice, Shakespeare marshals
up gems of abuse that would whoosh right over the
average boor’s head. Therefore, appropriating The Bard’s
18
Y’wanna piece
of me, sweetie?
19
Shakespeare, Addressing Individual Mounds
of Foul, Undigested Lumps of Donkey Entrails:
for those of the female persuasion
Hag of hell, fat chuff, latten bilbo (brass shackles),
painted maypole, long-tongued babbling gossip,and
Amazonian trull.
For men who have fallen out of one’s favor
False hound, untutored churl, rank weed, insolent cracker, unlettered
small-knowing soul, odoriferous stench, pigeon-egg of
discretion, dilatory sloth, homely swain, clod of wayward marl,
dunghill groom, puke-stocking, improvident flea, ronyon (mangy
or scabby creature), roastmeat for worms, princox (fop), cacoethes
(one with insatiable desire, usually disreputable), mad mustachio’d
purple-hued maltworm, prick-eared cur of—(fill in the
name of town, school, or neighborhood the cur claims as home),
and whoreson.
for one’s boss
Old feeble carrion, scolding crookbank, embossed carbuncle,
white-livered-red-faced prince of fiends, cacodemon (evil spirit),
maggot pie, execrable wretch, beef-witted, or sodden-witted
implorer of unholy suits.
to verbally backhand group obnoxiousness
You rabble of vile confederates, herd of boils and plagues, petty
spirits of region low, strangely visited people, foul and pestilent
congregation of vapors, college of witcrackers, dissolute crew, or
base lackey peasants.
words to one’s own needs will serve a dual purpose. It
confounds the ignorant and catches the erudite off guard.
Hence:
cavil, censure, denunciation, disparagement, reproach,
Under certain circumstances, profanity provides a
relief denied even to prayer.
Mark Twain ab
21
Sacre Bleu:
Profanities and
Expletives
w
The “F” ing Word & Other Intensives
Veritable, sure enough, or bona-fide are perfectly respectable
intensifiers when one needs, well, emphasis. Unfortunately,
fucking seems to be the hands-down pejorative of
choice in modern society. This being the case, we believe a
little historical perspective couldn’t hurt . . .
No matter how many people believe it true, it is highly unlikely
that the word “fuck” is an acronym of For Unlawful
Carnal Knowledge or that other old chestnut, Fornicate
Under Consent of the King. Eric Partridge believed it
evolved from the German word ficken for “to strike.” Like
most, he found the word objectionable. He, however, categorized
it along with words that he considered sadistic representations
of the male’s part in copulation: clap, strike,
thump, nail, and, yes, bang.Webster’s offers the derivations,
fokken (Dutch, to breed) or fokka (Swedish, to copulate).
Others suggest the French word foutre, to thrust, and even
firk (English 1600’s), to beat or to lash. However it originated,
it has been in use and considered a vulgarity the better
part of a millennium. As an intensive, Webster’s calls it
meaningless. There are those who would disagree.
To avoid inciting an affronted swoon
by the more sensitive souls of society,
acronyms have been embraced in place
of a number of phrases that include
the “f” word. Specifically, we have
GFY, which instructs one to do something
anatomically impossible (Go
Fuck Yourself ); GFU, a moron (General
Fuck-Up); and NFW, an implausibility
(No Fucking Way). Related
acronyms include SNAFU, a cynical
expectation of any situation in which
the military is involved (Situation
Normal, All Fucked-Up); FUBAR,
unrecognizably mussed (Fucked-Up
Beyond All Recognition); and there is
the sarcastic BFD (Big Fucking Deal).
Additionally, when one has been indisputably wronged, one
has been RF—Royally Fucked (also known as the king’s
elevator—the royal shaft). Just for the record, a flying
fuck is what one does not give, not airborne copulation.
And abso-fucking-lutely means beyond a shadow of a
doubt.
22
w
Merde
The four-letter word for defecation has been in use for
eons—which allows that antiquity does not necessarily dictate
grand lexicon. It is possible to avoid the vulgarity of
the word shit completely, as feces, manure, and dung all
mean the same thing. (Small point of interest: feces refer to
human waste, manure and dung, animal.) Other selections
tend to be polysyllabic but are colorful—meadow dressing,
bovine excrement, horse apples, corral confetti, etc.
Granted, if one is discussing political matters, it may be impossible
to avoid using (or even shouting) bullshit. However,
if one does not want to compromise decorum completely,
that can be shortened to B.S. Or, call it hogwash,
heifer dust, or lip-gloss. Bull-chips might do in a pinch
but, in all probability, not what pops out of one’s mouth
when faced with ultimate doom (at which time one will
most likely be up Shit Creek). Indeed, sources report that
when the black boxes are recovered from airplane crash
sites, invariably the last words on the tape are “Uh-oh,”
“Fuck!” and “Oh, shit. ”
Of course, one can use the French, merde or
speak of “a short French expletive” which
would in fact allow one to perform a rather impressive
circumlocutory hat trick, a euphemism
for a euphemism for euphemism.
When one finds it necessary to point out the
limitations of another’s character via the
23
cavil, censure, denunciation, disparagement, reproach,
alimentary canal, it is our position that it is preferable to
enlist mock Latin such as excrementum cerebellum vincit
rather than call someone a shit-head.
Other expressions that would benefit such translation are:
shit list (a mental note of personae non gratae); the shitty
end of the stick (the bad end of a bargain—often known
as the shaft); to shit or get off the pot (or fish or cut bait).
To shit in high cotton is to have attained a higher standard
of living. But not knowing shit from Shinola—well, that
means . . . owing to stupidity one cannot tell feces from
shoe polish. Someone whose continued presence is an
24
annoyance sticks like shit to a shovel. Alternatively,
shit on wheels reflects an over-inflated opinion of oneself.
(We, however, could in no way determine how one could
deign this to be a self-compliment).
Shit a brick technically means discharging a copious and
compacted bowel movement, but colloquially it refers to
accomplishing the impossible. Lastly, to be so angry as to
perform said impossibility is engaging in a shit-fit (also
known as pitching a bitch). Certainly there are Latin
instructors standing by to assist us.
w Vexed
As ancient a word as is piss, it was not until the last century
that humankind found use for it beyond the single
verb or noun. Nowadays, if one is pissed off, one is actually
choleric (and undoubtedly with one’s panties in
a bunch or knickers in a knot). Shakespeare expressed
it thusly: “You do me the most insupportable vexation.”
Other urinary-based euphemisms and their more civilized
translations: full of piss and vinegar (effervescent), piss
away (squander the inheritance—leaving oneself without a
pot to piss in), and piss blood (work with extreme diligence).
A piss-ass is a worthless individual (occasionally called an
arseworm), to engage in a pissing match is an endeavor
that is certain to be unproductive, and if one is piss-poor,
one is monetarily disadvantaged (e.g., without cable).
25
cavil, censure, denunciation, disparagement, reproach,
26
Full a’ piss and
vinegar, ye’ are!
Piss ugly is extremely unattractive
and if piss-faced, one
is overly medicated by alcohol.
The heretofore unheard of, pissed as
a newt has come to our attention. As we
have not personally been confronted by an
outraged salamander, we are uncertain of the
etymology or history of this term. We can only
labor under the supposition that in this situation,
“pissed” does mean vexed, for we believe one even less
likely to come across a drunken newt than a mean one.
VNOTE: The colorful late U. S. Vice President, John
Nance Garner is oft quoted as saying the office of Vice
President was not worth a bucket of warm spit. Those who
knew the man insist he didn’t use the word, “spit.”
Oaths and General
Vituperation
If a potty mouth forsakes stock curses and lets fly with the
likes of Jumpin’ Jehosaphat, just imagine the stunned
silence. Likewise, pshaw, Land a Goshen, Lord love a
duck, criminey, Ye Gods and little Fishes, pish-tosh, My
Well, bugger my giddy aunt.
Great Aunt Gussie—or as Great Aunt Gussie might say,
hells bells and panther tracks! While we understand these
oaths are insufficiently obscene for some, calling someone a
pinhead instead of a fuck-head will neither get one ticketed
nor beat like a one-legged step-child.
w
TheAbodeof theWickedDead
Down, down to hell;
and say I sent thee thither
Shakespeare
Technically hell is the nether realm of
the devil in which the damned suffer
everlasting punishment. In other words, a real sticky
wicket. The word in and of itself is not naughty. Nevertheless,
everyone knows (or at least suspects) that damning
someone to it is considered a blasphemy.
Hence, it is not surprising that an entire cottage industry
of euphemistic splendor has erupted from that word’s
roots. Indeed, the lengths to which people go to say it without
“saying it” is quite remarkable: Hades, Hail Columbia,
blue blazes, Cain, tarnation, Sam Hill, Kingdom Come,
You Know Where, or any place that implies “down there,”
the hot place, netherworld, lower regions, etc. Although
28
the Victorians gave us heck, perdition has been a suitable
alternative since the 14th century. Today we seldom hear
the once popular Go to Helen B. Happy. A shame, really.
Hellacious is a multi-purpose adjective that can mean either:
exceptionally powerful, remarkably good, extremely
difficult or extraordinarily large. To be hell-bent is
recklessly determined come hell or high water.
w
Doggone and Up Yours
Oh darn, dang, confound, consarn, dagnab, dash, blank,
or blast followed by it, are all euphemistic replacements for
the word, damn. All denounce someone or something as
evil. Truly genteel society frowns on these seemingly benign
adjectives as well as bloody, bleeding,
blamed, all-fired, dad-gummed, dratted,
and cotton-picking.
At one time, a curse was serious business.
No one took lightly being consigned
by another to hell, which may
be why Go to the Devil morphed
into Kiss My Ass. Go jump in the
lake or take a long walk off a short
pier are only nicer sounding ways to
tell someone to fold it five ways and
shove it where the sun don’t shine.
censure, denunciation, disparagement, reproach,oppro-
29
Silent Disparagement
(The Bird and His
Friends)
Although many think of it as contemporary,
digitus infamis or digitus impudicus (infamous
or indecent finger) as a phallic symbol has
been referenced in literary works as early as
ancient Rome. Mad-as-a-hatter Caligula was
rumored to hold up his middle finger for supplicants
to kiss.
There is the obvious suggestion of genitalia
in fist and extended middle finger, but we
have heard that during early warfare, captured
enemy archers had their fingers removed so they
couldn’t draw a bow. Therefore, holding up two fingers
(index and middle) backwards to one’s enemy signified
one could still do them damage. One could premise
that’s pretty much saying “f--- you.”
From the fight scene in Romeo & Juliet, which
commenced with the snapping of thumbnail under
the front teeth, to Texas A&M’s upraised “Gig ‘Em
Aggies” thumb, we see the ultimate insult can be insinuated
by other than extended middle finger. In the Arab world,
palm down, middle finger waggling downward means the
same as raised middle finger in the West.
31
censure, denunciation, disparagement, reproach,oppro-
VFYI: The little finger offered as
suggestion of a, shall we say, modestly
proportioned male part is not of modern
origin. Seek ye the Bible. I Kings 12:10.
32
To express general disrespect, there is the Cock a Snook,
also known as Ann’s Fan or Pulling Bacon, which is the
thumb on nose, fingers waving. To grasp one elbow and
raise a fist is one of the commonest insult
found worldwide, but is not universal.
That title must go to displaying
one’s naked backside. Anthropologists
say mooning predates Braveheart and,
loosely translated, meant “eat shit.”
After the fall of Bagdad, we saw Iraqis
beating the tar out of portraits and statues
of Saddam Hussein with their
shoes, revealing to westerners one of the strongest insults
of their culture—that of sticking the sole of your shoe in
someone’s face.
As there are any number of variations of armpit, bicep, fist,
finger, thumb, nose, crotch and spit . . . maneuvers to express
disrespect in different cultures, if one must hail a cab,
say, in Greece or New York, do so with all due caution.
Circumlocution
Because we often toss them about willy-nilly, we may forget
that euphemisms serve a greater purpose than merely
keeping the ladies at a garden party from glaring at us over
the top of their spectacles. A glib turn of phrase can spare
wounded feelings, a few mincing words keep lawyers at bay.
Until the Victorian era, however, the euphemistic mother
lode had not really begun to be mined. Once Queen Victoria
was on her throne and her minions on high alert, there
was little that couldn’t be accused of having a sexual, and
therefore, evil, connotation. Everything had to be renamed.
Hence, a bull became a cow’s spouse and one’s buttocks,
sit-upons. One can only imagine how dicey it must have
been sitting down at Sunday dinner for some poor soul
trying to ask for a specific piece of chicken.
w
A Woman of Expansive Sensibilities
Paphos was an ancient city of Cypress known for worshipping
Aphrodite. The well-traveled, or at least well-read,
33
Victorian men found it quite sly to call a prostitute or her
doings, Paphian. Further 19th century circumlocution favored
demimondaine, academician, abbess, courtesan,
Fille de jolie (fun gal) or nymph du pave (streetwalker). The
term of choice for those whose professions or predilections
sought to save her soul: she was a fallen woman.
One rarely hears of a lady of certain description or
painted woman anymore, but one would have to be pretty
obtuse not to understand the meaning. A little more recent
is woman of the night, streetwalker, naughty girl, and
commercial sex worker. A quick check of our Yellow Pages
did not uncover services by call girls. However, escort,
model, and actress listings are numerous and offer “discreet
billing.”
As for the specific establishment where these shenanigans
take place, a century ago it was referred to as a leaping
academy, vaulting school, disorderly house, knocking
shop, or chamber of commerce. However dated that
sounds, one must agree that today’s snake ranch or slut
hut is not much of an improvement. Granted, whorehouse
is to the point, but just a tad crude. If compelled to speak
of it, polite society might say it is a brothel, place of accommodation,
bagnio, or seraglio. Or, depending on your
frame of mind, house of ill-repute.
Furthering the subject, we proffer that he who pimps prostitutes
is not a pussy peddler, hole-toller, buttock broker,
vent renter, or crack salesman, but a panderer, procurer,
or the French, sounteneur, and with or without pimpmobile,
undoubtedly, a louse (editorially speaking).
For he who thinks he is pulling the wool over by describing
she who is gyrating upon his lap as an exotic dancer rather
Dividing the spoils?
35
denunciation, disparagement, reproach, opprobrium,
than a stripper, be advised, he can go one step further in
self- (or wife) delusion. Employing the term ecdysiast is
even more oblique. Although ecdysis does sound like a
moderately uncomfortable medical procedure, it is actually
the molting or shedding of a skin like a snake.
w
Men Much Taken With Wenching
As lechery appears to be an
accepted major by college-age
males, modern vernacular has responded.
Nowadays, he who pursues
such activities with undue
vigor is a walking hard-on. If the
little stud muffin has seen more
tail than a toilet seat, when the
dean writes home of his expulsion,
he may be described as of
distempered blood and duteous
to vices. (Well, maybe if he was
at Oxford.)
We can call him a debaucher,
libertine, flesh-monger, incubus,
Lothario, insatiate, or roué,
but it doesn’t make him any less
36
irredeemable. Of course, if he insists he is a man of the
world by way of visiting three county fairs and a goatfucking,
he undoubtedly is a bon viveur.
w
The Prevaricator
Liar, Liar, Pants on Fire
At one time, to question a
person’s honesty was no trivial
matter. Such was its consequence;
one dare not bandy
the word liar about. Therefore,
the more innocent prevaricator
was often accused
of only spinning a windy or
embroidering the truth. A
mountebank would lie like
a rug, and a charlatan was crooked as a barrel of snakes.
To piss in someone’s pocket means one is feeding him a
pack of lies.
A lie can travel halfway around the world
while the truth is putting on its shoes.
Mark Twain
37
denunciation, disparagement, reproach, opprobrium, Honest
Bob’s
Used
Wagons
If you seek the finest for
the least, Honest Bob
can procure it for you.
38
It’s hard to believe that a man is telling the truth
when you know that you would lie
if you were in his place.
H.L. Mencken
Current euphemisms such as terminological inexactitude
and economy with the truth dilly-dally about. When last
we checked, thou shalt not bear false witness against one’s
neighbor was still the ninth commandment. So “I misspoke”
won’t cut it with the keeper of the pearly gates.
A lie is an abomination to the Lord
and a very present help in trouble.
Adlai Stevenson
Although not technically lying, pettifoggery fits into this
category for general unscrupulousness. Since the 16th century,
it has described the antics of two or more lawyers
haggling unceasingly about minute matters thereby inflating
their client’s bill—thus proving the old axiom about the
more things change, the more they stay the same.
Q. Why do lawyers wear neckties?
A. To keep the foreskin from crawling up their chins.
disparagement, reproach, opprobrium, reproof,stricture,
w Tuft Hunters and Suck-ups
In English colleges such as Oxford, the aristocrats wore
special tassels (tufts) on their mortarboard hats to denote
their status. The more obsequious among the student body
sought them out, ergo—tuft-hunters. To most, these truly
annoying suck-ups are sycophants.
If overtaken by an undeniable need to
publicly decry this character flaw, one
might whip out one’s French dictionary
and sniff “leche-cul” (butt-kisser) right in
the servile flatterer’s face. Once out of high
school, however, it is advisable to sling
more derogatory comments such as
bootlicker and brown-noser behind the
back. If you do cast this particular stone,
understand that bootlicker is associated
with the habit of kissing the feet of kings
and therefore conveys a modicum of respectability (only
barely). However, it is often overlooked that brown-noser
refers to the result of smooching another part of the anatomy.
Shakespeare called them all puling pickthanks.
40
41
disparagement, reproach, opprobrium, reproof,stricture,
Clothes make
the man. Naked
people have little
or no influence
on society.
Mark Twain
w
In the Altogether
By definition, if one finds oneself in dishabille, one is carelessly
attired. In truth, that French term is often nothing
less than an outright accusation of misconduct. Not only
has one been cited for having one’s clothes in a muss, but
also by having them become that way because one has
been fooling around. Standard advice: Gather whatever
dignity one is able to muster, deny everything and make
a brisk exit.
If caught without a stitch in the great outdoors, one is au
natural. If indoors and can strike a pose, one is nude. In
the case of being stark-ballock-naked and in a compromising
situation, one is nekkid.* No defense—beat a hasty retreat
without the bugle call.
w
The Part that Goes Over the Fence Last
It is never necessary to use that three-letter word regardless
whether it has been in use since the 12th century. Nor
the four-letter one short for buttocks. Just say buttocks.
Or bottom, behind, or rear end for heaven’s sake. If that
is just too simple and one feels the need to express oneself
more floridly, we suggest posterior, derriere, ampersand,
parts behind, prat (hence, pratfall), differential, fanny,
fleshy part of the thigh, blind cheeks, bum, or tushy.
However we would like not, one hears, of course, of
ying-yang, wazoo, and poop-chute. Or if you prefer the
cloak of Latin, gluteus maximus.
42
*This southern colloquialism, often preceded by “buck,” is differentiated
from naked thusly: “Naked” means you do not have any clothes on.
“Nekkid” means you don’t have any clothes on and you’re up to no good.
There once was a woman from Mass
Who had an enormously large ass
when asked does it wiggle
she replied with a giggle
No, but it occasionally does pass gas.
43
reproach, opprobrium, reproof, stricture, vitriol, epithets
w
The Endomorph
He sweats to death,
And lards the lean earth as he walks along.
Shakespeare
“A goodly bulk,” Shakespeare
also called it. But
even on those rare occasions
when an absolute description
is unavoidable,
however ample the avoirdupois,
we believe buffalobutt,
barge-assed, or
hopper-hipped are unnecessarily
mean. Weightadvantaged
would be discreet.
With corpulent,
obese, or endomorphic,
one gets the broad-beamed
picture. Callipygian or
Rubenesque are downright
complimentary.
It is a long-held defense for
having an amply fleshed
mate that one is assured of
optimum warmth in the winter
and shade in the summer.
Conversely, lore tells of a
guy of disturbingly low
reproach, opprobrium, reproof, stricture, vitriol, epithets
morals and poor initiative who only dates fat girls because he
figures, “They don’t have much willpower.”
We are seeking out the purveyors of these stories in order
to exact retribution.
VNOTE: Any abuse is allowable if it is indemnified by
the “bless her heart” clause. The only criteria for its application
is that one can either claim Southern heritage or
manage a credible Southern drawl when it is employed:
“That girl is so fat, bless her heart, if she sat on a bug it
would fossilize in five minutes.”
Clarification: In the South, a boy or a girl is anyone under
the age of 60.
w
Ill-Favored by Nature
Whether or not a person looks like they fell from the ugly
tree and hit every branch on the way down, one certainly
would not want to make this observation within their earshot.
If it becomes necessary to describe an unprepossessing
person to a third party and one does not want to be
Never try to teach a pig to sing,
it wastes your time and annoys the pig.
Proverb
out-right deceptive, said person might be described as
unlovely, disagreeable to the eye, or a bit homely. Do
avoid butt-ugly at all costs (impolitic remarks have a nasty
history of payback).
The Paper Bag Rule
If only one paper bag over the head is necessary to keep
from frightening children, one is uncomely. Two paper
bags, admittedly hard-featured. Three paper bags, o.k.,
butt-ugly. If the person in question is a close friend or relative,
said person is plain but has a good personality.
Postscript: If one would chew off an arm in the morning to
escape undetected from a one-nighter who looked all right
when they said, “Last Call,” that person is Coyote Ugly
(owing to a coyote’s supposed willingness to chew off a
limb to get out of a steel-jaw trap).
46
The Lord prefers common-looking people.
That is the reason why he made so many of them.
Abraham Lincoln
In our western regions, if one looks a bit worse for the
wear, one has been rode hard and put up wet. If this colloquialism
needs explaining, then it would be wise not to try
to work that dog won’t hunt into the conversation either.
w
Short Pockets
A small-statured person is not sawed-off nor suffering from
duck’s disease (short legs), but is vertically-challenged,
abbreviated, a bit close to the ground, compact, diminutive,
petite, slight, undersized, wee, or not tall. Alternately
one with exceedingly long legs may have high pockets and
run like a dromedary with the staggers, but it would be
kinder to describe him as lean, lanky, or rangy. She is statuesque,
unless, of course she is a carbon copy of Olive Oyl.
If this is the case, one might want to disregard bony, emaciated,
scrawny, living stick, or skeletal and rely on slender
or a bit spare.
w
Buck-Toothed
As to why the French describe someone with protruding
teeth as dents a l’anglaise, we shall, in the name of diplomacy,
not look to the British throne.
47
opprobrium, reproof, stricture, vitriol, epithetsand
Bacchus hath drowned
more men than Neptune
Dr. Thomas Fuller
And ale for
my steeds!
Worshipping at the
Shrine of Bacchus
w
Killing a Few Brain Cells
Webster’s first definition for bibulous is “highly absorbent,”
which is probably why its second definition describes one
who over-imbibes on alcoholic substances. Over-imbibers
are also: besotted, befuddled, bleary-eyed, blotto, soused,
bombed, Bosco Absoluto, adrip, afloat, wall-eyed, cupshot,
lit, likkered up, walking on rock socks, or stinking
drunk.
An oenophile is a lover of wine. With the addition of a
prepositional phrase such as “of legendary proportions,”
said drinker is a wino.
The difference between a drunk and an alcoholic
is that drunks don’t have to attend all
those meetings.
How we identify inebriates today is not half so eloquent as
did our forefathers. Their excessive quaffers were called
49
belch-guts, bibblers, biled owls, bloaters, boosey-cocks,
bubbing-culls, cadgers, fuddle-caps, fuddlers, groghounds,
gullions, guttles, large-heads (a hands-down
favorite), lick-spigots, lick-wimbles, moist-uns, plonkdots,
squiffs, and tosspots.
The productive drunk is the bane of moralists.
Anon
50
An alcoholic is someone you don’t
like who drinks as much as you.
Dylan Thomas
The trouble with jogging
is that the ice falls
out of your glass.
w Paying for It
crapulous \ kra-pye-les\ adj [LL crapulosus,
fr. L crapula intoxication, fr. Gk
kraipale ] (1536) 1 : marked by intemperance
esp. in eating or drinking
2 : sick from excessive indulgence in liquor
If not behind the wheel, intemperance can
be relatively benign. Indeed, a crying jag
is embarrassing but hardly lethal. Be forewarned,
even wearing beer goggles (optically
impaired by drink) can get a limb
chewed off (see coyote ugly). In one’s
armor (fighting drunk) is the best way to
get ass-whupped.We don’t even want to
talk about the infamous brewer’s droop (also known as
whiskey dick). While the morning after one may be spitting
feathers, visited by the brown bottle flu implies a trip
to Europe with Ralph and Earl in a Buick.
I always keep a stimulant handy in case
I see a snake, which I also keep handy.
W.C. Fields
The beezie-weezies sound kind of cute. If you have
them it means an array of colorful visitors from the
animal kingdom have come to call on you (pink
elephants, blue devils, red spiders, a black
dog, or snakes—of any hue—in one’s boots).
51
reproof, stricture, vitriol, epithets and vituperation
They are also synonymous with the screaming meemies, a
term a tad more accurate. But the presence of either means
the delirium tremens or DTs have invaded. And, if on the
wagon is not something the afflicted has yet contemplated,
clearly, the time is at hand.
VFYI: St. Bibiana, 4th century Spanish
Patron Saint of hangovers
52
You’re not drunk if
you can lie on the floor
without holding on.
its, disease, ill health, infirmity, breakdowns, affliction,
ailment, attacks, bugs, collapse, complaint, confinement,
convalescence, disability, disorder, disturbance, dose,
failing health, flu, indisposition, malady, malaise,
prostration, seizure, syndrome, a bit of unwell, and
what’s been going around
I need to see the
Duchess of York.
Indisposition
They do not fall under the canopy of saving face, litigation,
nor feelings. No, these situations have to be the reason
euphemisms were invented in the first place.
w
Gastro-Intestinal Disorder
Few of life’s miseries have escaped schoolyard ridicule,
occasionally even put to rhyme. Therefore,
it is not surprising that lower intestinal
disturbance inspired at least one school-age
ditty—“When you’re sliding into home and your
pants are full of foam, diarrhea, diarrhea . . .”
There is an array of frank terms that describe
not the bowel disorder itself, but the
rapid response it necessitates. Hence, far
too often we hear the runs, quickstep,
sprints, trots, scoots, scatters, etc. Yet,
admittedly, any of these are preferable to
excusing oneself to company by declaring
onset of the screaming shits. Additionally,
if on one’s vacation one has an attack of the
turistas, assigning specific ethnic blame
Going to Europe with Ralph and Earl in a Buick
If one is sick to one’s stomach, we believe that is all the
information one needs to share. Throwing up or vomiting
are also perfectly good descriptive terms. It has been
our experience, once that announcement has been made,
everyone pretty much gets out of your way on the way to
the lavatory.
We reduce ourselves to the indelicacy of delineating regurgitation
euphemisms for no other reason than it is an absolute
playground for onomatopoetic words such as gurk,
urp, and barf. With one’s head stuck down the big white
phone, one can talk to Earl, Ralph, or Cousin Sis, call
Hughie or cry Ruth.
Invariably, the most colorful are offered up by friends of the
vomitee recounting the entire event to avid listeners: flash
the hash, flay the fox, feed the fish, drive the Buick,
bow to the porcelain altar, hug the throne, toss
tacos, woof cookies, laugh at the carpet, launch
one’s lunch, de-food, bestow a Technicolor yawn,
heave Jonah, blow beets, park a custard, or go see
the Duchess of York.
Evidently, there is bovine sub-category provision for the escalation
of vomiting: to bison (be nauseated), yak (very
nauseated), or water buffalo (throw up one’s toenails).
57
Fits, disease, ill health, infirmity, breakdowns, affliction, ailment, such as Montezuma’s revenge, Dehli-belly, Mexican twostep,
Spanish squirts, Botswana bop, or Cairo crud does
nothing to improve international goodwill.
Let’s face it, unless one is sitting on the edge of an examining
table wearing nothing but a gaping hospital gown, “I
am unwell,” is pretty much all anyone needs to tell.
w
Pussyfooting around The Curse
When OTR (on the rag) or having that time
of the month, few occurrences engender more
verbal pussyfooting (again, no pun intended) than
women’s troubles.
Victorian ladies suffered from domestic affliction. So general
a term, however, could mean either the sink is stopped
up or one’s husband is a cur. Today we seldom hear of the
flowers, floods, vapors, wretched calendar, or high tide.
While weathering feminine complaint, then as now, not
only can one entertain the general or fly the red flag, one
can have the painters in, a wet weekend, endure wallflower
week, or a visit from Aunt flo. When the British
have landed (wearing red coats), the Captain is at home
and it is BENO time (there’ll be no fun).
Inevitably, the onset of one’s menstrual period requires
covering the waterfront by the wearing of a sanitary
58
product. It is preferable to specify
perineal pad or tampon by brand
name (Kotex, Tampax, etc.), else one
is left with a hopeless number of riding
analogies: the cotton bicycle, red stallion,
white sling, white horse, or
fanny mattress.
From a male point of view, this item is
identified as peter-cheater or manhole
cover which, while applicable, are in
poor taste. Pleasure garden padlock
sounds oh-so-refined, but we haven’t conjured
an occasion when this, as a topic of
general conversation, was.
w
Crawling Creatures
When once only an accusation one screamed at the opposite
sex at recess, cooties have become a renewed nuisance,
not only to school children, but to the population in general.
(There are those who blame this phenomenon entirely
on the hippie generation.) One would think such progress
would have birthed a parallel vocabulary. That seems not
the case. Euphemisms for pediculosis, while dated, are
interesting: light troops, active citizens, bosom chums,
familiars, walking dandruff, intimate friends, and seam
squirrels.
59
VNOTE: Lobby lice are found in hotels,
but of the two-legged variety, not eight.
60
Genital or crab lice are crotch pheasants and pants rabbits.
Lice are chats, hence, technically, a chatty person is
not loquacious, but slovenly.
That nightly admonition to not let them bite not withstanding,
few of us ever encounter bedbugs anymore. To the
Victorians, they were a fact of life, yet a troubling conundrum.
The more fastidious citizens of society refused to utter
the word “bug” because of its unfortunate connotation
(see The Love That Durst Not Speak Its Name). Hence,
the pesky critters were known as gentlemen in brown,
B-flats, or Norfolk Howard (which may or may not reference
either the War of the Roses or Flodden Field—far too
obscure for a non-Anglophile to ascertain).
w
Social Diseases
Disgraceful disorders refer specifically to gonorrhea
(the clap) and syphilis (the pox). Other substitutes are:
bad blood, nasty complaint, bone ache, foul disease, delicate
taint, pintle fever, fire down below, forget-me-not,
Venus’ curse, and infinite malady. Historically, however,
such misfortune appears to have incited unlimited opportunity
to disparage various ethnicities: French measles,
Neapolitan favor, Spanish gout, Irish mutton, and
Rangoon itch.
61
w Foul Emanations
There once were two men in black suits
who had trouble controlling their poots
At lunch one finally said
As the other nodded his head
We should switch now from beans to fruits
Breaking Wind
Should one befoul the
air with an unduly emphatic
noise, one has
committed a rouser.
If one got by, it was a
blind-fart also known
the acronym SBD—
silent but deadly. Anything
in between is
a backfire, backdoor
trumpet, bad powder,
buck-snort, or bathtub
bubble. In addition,
a whistle
britches can suffer
butter’s revenge or
pocket thunder.
ailment, attacks, bugs, collapse, complaint, confinement,convalescence,
62
Under these audible
circumstances (if the dog
is unavailable to blame),
someone might have stepped
on a frog, talked German
(supposed guttural reference),
cut a rusty, sliced the
cheese, or shot rabbits. If
any of these aforementioned
indiscretions occur and the
offender does not know to
look suspiciously at others,
then that person does not
deserve to inhabit polite society.
As already observed,
when one is beset by gastrointestinal
disorder, there is
little discretionary reaction
time. We shall assume any
sullying of the air, too, is
inadvertent, giving all transgressors
(you know who you
are) blanket clemency.
This is the rankest
compound of villainous smell that
ever offended nostril.
Shakespeare
63
convalescence, disability, disorder, disturbance, dose, failing
There once was a wonderful wizard
who had a great pain in his gizzard
So he ate wind and snow
at 50 below
and farted a forty day blizzard.
VFYI: Breaking wind was actually a great party trick
in the Renaissance. Even Dante wrote of a fartiste
who made a trumpet of his ass. At the turn of last
century, a French nightclub performer, Joseph Pujol,
reportedly plied his artistry in the Moulin Rouge. Although
known to play O Solo Mio on the ocarina, his
tour de force was an anal rendition of Claire de Lune.
Dog Breath
If one’s breath is strong enough to carry coal, could fell a
horse at twenty paces, or smells like the Chinese army
has walked through one’s mouth in their sweat socks,
one has halitosis.
Some small woodland creature sneaked
into his mouth and used it as a latrine.

65
In the Privy
w
Calls of Nature
In Elizabethan time, the place of ease was known as a jakes,
this was eventually corrupted to ajax. Derivation of another
more oft used term for the facilities, the loo remains under
disagreement. Some like l’eau (French for water), others
insist it lieu (as in “place”). Nonetheless, euphemisms for
the room that contains a toilet can fall into two categories.
In the first, based on the concept of contrary connotation,
we have bank, chapel, coffee shop, commons, counting
house, cottage, library, office, parliament, Spice Island,
or the temple.
The less verbally discriminating, however, relieve themselves
in a bog, cacatorium, can, compost hole, dilberry
creek, dunny, forakers, john, necessarian, place where
one coughs, siege-house, or stool of ease. In most places
in Europe, one seeks the W.C. (water closet), which seems
infinitely more reasonable than in America’s restroom
(where one may sit but does not necessarily rest).
VFYI: Yes, the story is apparently true, there actually
was a Thomas Crapper who invented a flush toilet.
w Wring Out One’s Socks
Our study has revealed a vast disparity
between the number of euphemisms for
male urination (lots) compared to those
for female (zilch). This may well fall to
the unquestionably finer sensibilities prevalent amongst the
lady-folk. Either that or if one sits to release one’s bladder,
it is a solitary, quiet event. There is very little associated
activity once one has made certain the toilet seat is down.
But he who has a penis with which to pee can even write
his name in the snow—well, for argument’s sake, we suppose
a woman could do it, but it would take a while.
Men can also take the snake for a gallop, siphon the
python, shake hands with the bishop, point Percy at the
porcelain, or train Terrance on the terracotta after which
they can shake the dew off the lily.
Either sex could give the Chinaman a music lesson, but in
that few use china pots in which to tinkle anymore, it is
generally obsolete.
As an exit excuse to relieve themselves, men go water the
horses, feed the goldfish, see how high the moon is, kill a
snake, chase a rabbit, drain the radiator, or check the ski
rack.Women seem to just go to the “Ladies” to powder
their noses (albeit a bit nonsensically, in pairs).
66
VNOTE: There was a hunt-themed restaurant that
initiated some baffled head-scratching among their patrons
by labeling their respective restrooms, Pointers and
Setters.
67
flu, indisposition, malady, malaise, prostration, seizure, syndrome,

Afflicted by Time’s
Wing’d Chariot
Be kind to your children, they will choose
your nursing home.
For those of us middle-aged (assuming everyone lives to
be 110), a person of maturity has the dwindles, is a bit
forward at the knees, long in the tooth, white-topped,
blue-haired, rusting out, old as the hills, in one’s dotage,
and no spring chicken, whiling away their time in God’s
waiting room.
CAUTION: Make very certain the senior citizen of
whom one speaks is deaf as a post before one utters any
of these little nuggets. Else, the person upon whom one
remarks is always distinguished.
He is alive, but only in the sense
that he can’t be legally buried.
Geoffrey Madan (subject of the observation unknown)
70
w
The Bucket Kick’d
Are there any grander occasions to pull out all the stops,
euphemistically speaking, than speculating on just where
the dearly departed’s place of eternal rest will be? The
late-lamented could land in Abraham’s bosom, be church
triumphant, called to a higher service, or, less optimistically,
stoking Lucifer’s fires. Non-ecumenically, a quietus
or an exitus could have occurred.
Better judgment would insist (at least insofar as the eulogy)
one avoid calling the deceased either worm food or
buzzard meat.
Pardon My Dust
Dorothy Parker’s epitaph by
Dorothy Parker
There appears to be a paradoxical
inclination by the bereaved
to insist said worm
food to action when they have
had a mortality experience
(a term popular with the mortuary
profession). Hence, we
hear the dearly departed may
suck grass, grin at daisy
roots, buy the farm, give up
the ghost, pay nature’s debt,
pull a cluck, cash in one’s
chips, fold one’s hand, coil
one’s rope, drop off the hook,
71
slip the cable, sun one’s moccasins, take the long count,
jump the last hurdle, drop the cue, ride off on the last
round-up, or answer the ever-lasting knock.
The report of my death was an exaggeration.
Mark Twain, after reading his own obituary, June 2, 1897
Suicide is our way of telling God,
you can’t fire me—I quit.
72
One of the funniest of Monty Python’s routines involved
the return of a dead parrot, “Maybe he’s just shagged out
after a long squawk—no, he’s bleeding demised, ceased
to be, bereft of life, joined the choir invisible . . .”
One can go wearing the Q (the death face rather coarsely
delineated by comics—tongue lolling out the corner of the
mouth), feet first, toes up, eyes closed, heels foremost,
face turned to the wall, on one’s shield, in a box, or in
repose . . . whence one goes to the bone orchard.
ender specific activity, femininity, manhood,
manliness, masculinity, sexuality, womanhood,
womanliness, intercourse between animate beings,
coition, coitus, copulation,
intimacy, lovemaking, G
magnetism, procreation, relations, reproduction, sensuality, sexuality
fornication, generation,
Bed is the poor
man’s opera.
Italian Proverb
74
A hard man is
good to find.
Mae West
Bewitched, Bothered
and Betwattled
R
Overborne by Desire
Few, if any, still believe that only the male gender suffers
from the pangs of lust. If proof be needed, the phenomena
of Valentino, Elvis and Chippendale’s dancers provide full
support for the theory that sexual appetence is an equal
opportunity employer. Yet, regardless how prevalent its
use, we again point out that the word horny, via horn,
comes from a root word pertaining to the erect penis.
Therefore, for absolute accuracy, a woman may be just as
lustful, dissolute, concupiscent, lascivious, libidinous,
salacious, appetent, licentious, ribald, prurient, wanton,
or humpy as a man, but, unless born a hermaphrodite, or
completed gender reassignment, she will not be horny.
Those terms describing the throes of excess cupidity can
be gender specific and—however we wish they not—the
examples that come to mind for men are pussy simple,
cunt-struck and betwattled. Although a woman may have
75
hot pants or be cocksmitten, we prefer to say either is
confounded by love (more likely confounded by lust, but
it is not our place to proselytize). The unmistakable (and
most conspicuous) concomitant of desire, however, is
borne by the male: Penis in erectus.
F Temporary Priapism
Although it might initially sound like a Viagra high, a
priapism (named after Priapus, a Greek and Roman god
of male generative power) is a medical condition that manifests
itself by an unrelenting erection which is quite painful
76
A stiff prick has
no conscience.
Ancient Proverb
and—here’s the catch—is unrelieved by sexual gratification.
We will remark only upon the temporary kind.
Unlikely as it is to be referenced in one of Martha Stewart’s
fine books, for procreative (or recreational) purposes
everyone will agree that an erection is A Good Thing.
However, if the little devil rears its head when copulation
is merely on the mind but not imminent, it might prompt
some explaining—something we did not find indexed by
Miss Manners either.
If a rise in one’s Levi’s is espied by someone peripheral to
the action, we advise the male in question to adopt an air of
innocence and complain of an involuntary biological reaction.
Genital tumescence, virile reflex, and male arousal
are equally non-accusatory terms. All are preferable to hat
rack, blue-veiner, clothes prop, tent peg, live rabbit,
proud meat, horn colic, bit of a stiff, or sporting some
wood—even if one is ready to dig post holes with it.
VNOTE: Many men consider an inadvertent hard-on
(an expression we do not endorse) as an unwitting condition
and maintain, therefore, that they should not be held
accountable for that over which they hold no control (see
The Unruly Member).
Certainly beyond one’s sway is morning pride, which, for
exonerative purposes, can be identified as matutinal erection.
Indeed, if the male can convey an appropriately
sleepy-headed look, this excuse is good until noon. If one’s
nocturnal erection is inexplicably relieved during the
night, one has shot the bishop.
Gender specific activity, femininity, manhood, manliness, masculinity,
77
78
Another actual affliction is erethism, an abnormal irritability
or responsiveness to stimulation. Erethism (it too comes
from Greek, but we did not find any reference to the god of
crankiness) is an actual disorder, which does give marginal
credibility to the otherwise questionable assertion by some
men that for arousal they need no more inducement than a
stiff breeze. One could propose either of these ailments as
reason for undue . . . excitement, but both are a bit obscure.
We suggest one assert oneself as constitutionally inclined
to passion. It sounds a bit Edwardian, but far better
than randy as a goat.
Beware: If one needs to call upon this explanation
while wearing nothing more than a trench coat, it is
probable the police will look upon one’s suffering
unsympathetically. The docket sheet will read lewd
conduct, however, not weenie-wagger.
Is that a gun in
your pocket—or are you
just glad to see me?
Mae West
F
Humbled in the Act of Love
Alternately, if the male member remains flaccid regardless
of encouragement, he is suffering from orgiastic impotence.
He has not only failed in the furrow, he has no
money in his purse, lead in his pencil, ink in his pen, nor
toothpaste in his tube. When his ability is thus compromised,
he is slack in his matrimonial duty or leaving the
pillow unprest. The culprit is itself deadwood, a dangling
participle, dolphin, flounder, lob-cock, half-mast, flat
tire, hanging Johnny, or Mr. Softy.
femininity, manhood, manliness, masculinity, fornication, generation,
79
The Long Carbine
Whether one is endowed with a howitzer or peashooter,
guns are, and always have been, phallic symbols.
In the 17th century, flintlock guns had a hammer, a flint to
produce a spark, a lockpan that held the priming powder
and a main charge behind the
musket ball. When the hammer
was released, it hit a small flint
rock igniting a spark that lit the
priming powder, and if all went
as planned, then exploded the
main charge. Sometimes this prehigh-
tech procedure backfired
and the priming powder flashed
but did not ignite the main charge.
Hence a flash in the pan, but no
shot was produced. If one had
game (or the enemy) in one’s
sights but needed time to aim,
the hammer could be partially
cocked. If the gun fired while
in this position, it went off halfcocked—
no doubt a quite vexing
and dangerous occurrence.
80
81
manhood, manliness, masculinity, fornication, generation, sexuality,
We recount all of this seeming arcane information only to
provide background to fully understand the following:
If one achieves an erection but one’s intention is thwarted by
a premature ejaculation, one has gone off half-cocked, fired
in the air, shot in the bush, misfired, or has experienced
a flash in the pan. Hanging fire occurs when the priming
powder initially failed to ignite the main charge. This term
has come to be synonymous with indecision, not as some insist,
a lengthy orgasm. These expressions have been bandied
about for both sexual and non-sexual purposes for centuries.
When we study their origins, they do make perfect sense.
Sometimes a cigar is just a cigar.
Attributed to Sigmund Freud
As much as it sounds as if it should be, we all know to
peter-out is not necessarily a sexual innuendo. In fact, the
dictionary definitions for peter are as follows: (1) to diminish,
(2) to become exhausted, (3) a vulgar name for one’s
penis, and (4) one of the twelve apostles. (Insomuch as
one’s penis (3) diminishes (1) when it becomes exhausted
(2), we will conclude that other than that the Apostle Peter
(4) must have had one, he is irrelevant to this discussion).
The French word pete means to explode weakly (also an
expulsion of intestinal gas). Peter dans la main means literally,
to come to nothing. The Dictionary of Word Origins says
that peter-out originated with miners in the mid-1800’s (an
explanation of which, trust us, is even less relevant than
the Apostle Peter). Regardless, what we do know is that to
peter-out means to give out—be spent—and usually not
with a bang (so to speak). Lest one’s lover be unconsoled,
we suggest it is time to explore The French Arts.
If one can get it up, but is sterile—firing blanks, or engaging
in a dry bob, one is improcreant.
82
Agriculturalsidebar
For those unaware, when a horse
and a donkey mate, their offspring
is a mule, a hybrid. This hybrid cannot
reproduce; hence, one occasionally
hears an improcreant male
referred to as a mule.
Dallying,
Firkytoodling, and
Finkdiddling
If one has the Jones for another, as a rule, one dares not
jump their bones without first introducing oneself. Under
the right circumstances, small talk can be dispensed with,
but it is reasonable to
insist that if copulation
is the goal, at least
a little foreplay is in
order. This is known
as canoodling.
Engaging in tonsil
hockey, chewing face,
and cow kissing means,
in baseball analogy,
one has arrived at first
base. Copping a feel
above the waist is a
double. The digital
investigation of a
83
female’s privates (otherwise known as down there) is a bit
for the finger and progression to third base (a hand down
a man’s pants is probably third base also, but one seldom
hears women using sports analogies). Reasonably, physical
congress is going all the way, because one has scored
( yes, scored) a home run.
If one ruts on another without penetration or relocation of
one’s clothing, it is called a dry hump and runners do not
advance to home. Male students of an Ivy League school
perform the Princeton rub and, we are told, no one scores
(bats, if not balls, being optional).
r
Making the Beast with Two Backs
To have a legion of suitable euphemisms for doing the big
nasty at one’s fingertips, there is a very simple formula.
Merely select any combination
of an adjective
from the first column
and noun from the
second. Voila!
84
Adjective Noun
Physical congress
Carnal knowledge
Intimate necessities
Capital embrace
Amorous favors
Connubial attention
Passionate connection
Fulfilling arrangements
Horizontal relief
Illicit affections
Nocturnal pleasures
Conjugal union
Voluptuous combat
Loving consummation
Secret deed
Lewd rites
Naughty conflict
Night association
Nuptial coupling
When in want of euphemistic eloquence, however, we often
rely on Latin as in in coitu or actus coitus. Shakespeare’s
words, however, are positively rhapsodic: The very lists of
love, to make one’s heaven in a lady’s lap, dance on one’s
heels, lay it to one’s heart, or behind door work. Indeed,
having an enseamed or fortunate bed sounds a skosh classier
than parking the pink mustang up a side street. Granted,
Shakespeare was capable of circumlocutory stretch. Groping
for trout in a peculiar river means fishing in a private
stream, which means knowing someone in the Biblical
sense. Knowing someone in the Biblical sense means
manliness, masculinity, fornication, generation, sexuality, womanhood 85
86
that one is engaging in an act of generation, androgyny
(no, not Boy George—at least not necessarily), original
sin, shame, darkness, or, in the words of Delbert McClinton,
plain ol’ makin’ love.
R We Are Not Amused
In Victorian times, illicit love referred to sexual shenanigans
between anyone outside of holy wedlock. So heinous
was such activity, it was called criminal conversation (a
more stupefyingly cryptic euphemism we have yet to behold).
If it became necessary to allude to such foul doings
in print, even so ambiguous a term as criminal conversation
was far too explicit. It was abbreviated as crim. con.
or even c.c., a ruse that was not particularly effective.
Sociologists explain
that sexual shenanigans
inside holy wedlock
were frowned on as
well, but we understand
that authorities
were seldom able to
actually make arrests
for it.
H Wreak One’s Passion
If our ancestors’ sensibilities in print were euphemized into
total obscurity, private conversations were not held to the
same standard. We note that the designation for the act of
c.c. was then, as now, often preceded
by an acquiring verb: getting,
having, copping, grabbing, nabbing,
snatching, fetching, wanting,
and occasionally, begging for any
noun used to specify the female pudendum.
Typical of these nouns are
cookie, nooky, ass, beaver, bird,
jam, pork, bob, snug, box, bull’s
eye, buns, booty, cat, pussy, crack,
cranny, crotch, down, flesh, hole,
fur-pie, honey-pot, kitty, lap, milk,
monkey, mouse, muff, naughty,
oyster, poontang, rump, squirrel,
twat, twittle, and you-know-what
(often times further identified adjectively
as a bit of). All are, even
now, substituted for the detested
“c” word.*
masculinity, fornication, generat ion, sexuality, womanhood, womanliness,
87
*Although it has been in use since the
14th century, we offer less sensibility stunning
euphemisms for the monosyllable
under the heading The Little Man and
His Boat.
On occasion, this vast array of monosyllabic choices causes
an exceedingly aroused male to abandon assigning what he
wants a specific name. He may eliminate the use of a noun
altogether and just says some (get some, want some, etc).
However brainless this sounds, we have to give credit here.
Although man is an unwitting party, Webster’s does define
the word some as “being an unknown, undetermined, or unspecified
unit or thing.” This suggests that when in rut, the
male of the species does not like to restrict his possibilities.
p To Spend
If referring to the male orgasm, shot his wad, blown off,
spooged, or popped his nuts are unnecessary. He has experienced
sexual reflex. He can also have eventuation,
emissio seminis, or effect emission
(although we admit the latter does
sound a bit like a NASA instruction).
For women, making the chimney
smoke seems not overly graphic, but
again, we prefer the French, petit
mort meaning little death. Come,
spend, and get off do refer to orgasm
for both sexes, but then, so does